RIVERBANK, CALIFORNIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2024 S-23 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2024-005, passed 10-22-24
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Ordinance No. 99-09
An Ordinance of the City Council of the City of Riverbank Enacting a Code of
Ordinances for the City of Riverbank, California, Revising, Amending,
Restating, Codifying and Compiling Certain Existing General Ordinances of the
Political Subdivision Dealing with Subjects Embraced in Such Code of
Ordinances.
   Whereas, The present general and permanent ordinances of the Political
Subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
   Whereas, The Acts of the Legislature of the State of California, empower and
authorize the City of Riverbank to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile
any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or
published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and
   Whereas, The Legislative Authority of the City of Riverbank has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of
Riverbank of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance
in book form; and
   Whereas, It is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
Now, Therefore, Be It Ordained by the Legislataive Authority of the Political
Subdivision of the City of Riverbank, California:
Section 1.
   The general ordinances of the City of Riverbank as revised, amended,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Riverbank, California."
Section 2.
   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following Titles:
      Title I:      General Provisions.
      Title III:   Administration
      Title V:    Public Works
      Title VII:   Traffic Code
      Title IX:   General Regulations
      Title XI:   Business Regulations
      Title XIII:   General Offenses
      Title XV:   Land Usage
Section 3.
   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in
such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.
   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the effective date of its adoption
and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the City of
Riverbank is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 5.
   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section 6, and
such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.
   This Ordinance shall become effective thirty (30) days from and after its
final passage and adoption, provided it is published in full or in summary in a
newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to its
effective date.
The foregoing ordinance was introduced at a regular meeting of the City Council
of the City of Riverbank held on June 14, 1999. Said ordinance was given a
second reading at a regular meeting of said Council on June 28, 1999, and
Councilmember Lineberger, seconded by Councilmember Gutierrez, moved the
adoption of said ordinance and said ordinance was adopted by the following
vote:
      Ayes:      Councilmembers White, Gutierrez, O'Brien, Lineberger, and
Mayor Benitez.
      Noes:       None.
      Absent:   None.

Attest:                           Approved:
Elise A. Smurzynski /s/                Sandra Benitez /s/
Elise A. Smurzynski                     Sandra Benitez
City Clerk                        Mayor
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Rules of Construction
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.19   Notice; proof of service
   
10.20   Maintenance of code
   
10.21   Violations; imposition and determination of penalty
   
10.22   Place of confinement
   
10.23   Liability of officers
   
10.24   Power to arrest
Citation Procedure
   
10.30   Notice to appear; form
   
10.31   Violation of promise to appear
   
10.32   Warrant for arrest
 
   
10.99   General penalty
RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Riverbank shall be
designated as the City Code of Riverbank and may be so cited.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Specific definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CALENDAR YEAR. From January 1 through December 31 of any given year.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Riverbank,
California.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Riverbank.
      COUNTY. Stanislaus County, California.
      DAY. A calendar day unless otherwise expressed.
      FISCAL YEAR. From July 1 of any given year through June 30 of the
following year.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such
building or land.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. This term shall include money, goods, chattels, things
in action, and evidences of debt.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Both real and personal property.
      QUARTERLY. When used to designate a period of time, shall mean the first
three calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three
calendar months.
      REAL PROPERTY. This term shall include lands, tenements, and
hereditaments.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of California.
      STREET. This term shall include all streets, highways, avenues,
boulevards, alleys, courts, places, squares, or other public ways in the city
which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such
other public property so designated in any law of this state.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, the terms shall
include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land,
whether alone or with others.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the
words YEAR OF OUR LORD.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following
rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
"and/or," if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this city for the transaction of all municipal
business.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body shall take effect in
accordance with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 36937 or other applicable
state statute.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the ordinance repealing or
modifying it becomes effective, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (Cal. Penal Code § 1212) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed
1-1-85).
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This city shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
   all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see
       Cal. Gov't Code §§6250 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous Code of
Ordinances of the city published in 1967 and subsequently amended, the 1967
code section number shall be indicated in the history by "('67 Code, §__)."
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.19 NOTICE; PROOF OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless
different provisions are otherwise specifically made in the code, such notice
may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified
or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to such person to be notified at his last known business or residence
address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records
pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail
shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the Postal
Service.
   (B)   Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any
officer or employee of the city or by affidavit of any person over the age of
18 years, which affidavit shows service in conformity with this code or other
provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.20 MAINTENANCE OF CODE.
   (A)   Not less than three copies of this code shall be filed for use and
examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk. At least three
additional copies, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be maintained on
file in his office as the official copies of the code. Additional copies of the
code shall be distributed to the departments and divisions of the city as shall
be prescribed by the City Manager.
   (B)   Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to this code, or upon
the repeal of any of its provisions, the City Clerk shall certify thereto and
shall make an appropriate notation in the official volumes of this code of the
taking of such action, noting the number and date of the ordinance pursuant to
which such action is taken.
   (C)   Duly certified copies of each ordinance making changes in the code
shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk in books for such purpose, duly
indexed for ready reference.
   (D)   Annually, the City Clerk shall cause the loose leaf pages of this code
in which changes have been made to be reproduced, including the notation as to
the ordinance number and date pursuant to which such change is adopted, and
distributed in order that the loose leaf copies of the code, prepared for the
use and convenience of the officers and employees of the city and the general
public, may be brought up-to-date.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.21 VIOLATIONS; IMPOSITION AND DETERMINATION OF PENALTY.
   (A)   Prohibited acts. Whenever in this code any act or omission is made
unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or
concealing the fact of such act or omission.
   (B)   Imposition of penalty. The provisions of this code which declare
certain crimes to be punishable as therein mentioned devolve a duty upon the
court authorized to pass sentence to determine and impose the punishment
described.
   (C)   Determination of punishment. Whenever in this code the punishment for
a crime is left undetermined between certain limits, the punishment to be
inflicted in a particular case shall be determined by the court authorized to
pass sentence, within such limits as may be prescribed by this code.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.22 PLACE OF CONFINEMENT.
   Every person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this code
and sentenced to imprisonment shall be imprisoned in the County Jail or other
authorized facility.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
§ 10.23 LIABILITY OF OFFICERS.
   No provision of this city code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
intention of the Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty.
('67 Code, § 1-4-4) (Ord. 76-4, passed 1-9-76; Am. Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-
08)
§ 10.24 POWER TO ARREST.
   It shall be the duty of the City Manager, the Building Inspector, the
Community Development Director, the Director of Public Works, the Community
Service Officer, and all members of the Riverbank Police Services Division to
enforce the provisions of this code. Each of the public officers is authorized,
pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, to arrest violators of this code without a
warrant whenever the public officers have reasonable cause to believe that the
person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor, which is a violation of this
code in the presence of such public officers.
('67 Code, § 1-4-5) (Ord. 83-6, passed 7-25-83; Am. Ord. 85-08, passed 7-22-85;
Am. Ord. 88-12, passed 10-10-88; Am. Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
CITATION PROCEDURE
§ 10.30 NOTICE TO APPEAR; FORM.
   If any person shall be arrested for the violation of any provision of this
code or any other law of the city, and such person is not taken before a
judicial officer as prescribed in the California Penal Code, the arresting
officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court,
containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the
time and place where and when such person shall appear in court.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Cal. Penal Code § 853.6(a)
§ 10.31 VIOLATION OF PROMISE TO APPEAR.
   Any person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon
which he was originally arrested.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Cal. Penal Code § 853.7
§ 10.32 WARRANT FOR ARREST.
   When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place
specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided
in the Cal. Penal Code § 853.6, the judicial officer shall issue and have
delivered for execution a warrant for such person's arrest within 20 days after
his failure to appear as promised, or, if such person promises to appear before
an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so
on or before the date which he promised to appear, then, within 20 days after
the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate
having jurisdiction over the offense.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Cal. Penal Code § 853.8
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to
fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code or the provisions of
any code adopted by reference by this code. Any person violating any of such
provisions or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this code shall
be guilty of an infraction unless by the provisions of this code a violation is
declared to be a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any
provisions of this code or of a city ordinance is committed, continued, or
permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly.
   (B)   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this code, any person
convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the City Jail or County
Jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
   (C)   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this code, or by Cal. Veh.
Code § 42002, every person convicted of an infraction shall be punished upon a
first conviction by a fine not exceeding $100, and for a second conviction
within a period of one year by a fine not exceeding $200, and for a third or
any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine not exceeding
$500.
(Ord. 2008-009, passed 10-13-08)
Statutory reference:
   Penalties for misdemeanor violations, see Cal. Penal Code § 19
   Penalties for infractions, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 36900 and 36901
   Imprisonment, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 36903 and 36904
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   CITY COUNCIL
         
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
         
32.   CITY BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
         
33.   FINANCE
         
34.   TAXATION
         
35.   PERSONNEL
         
36.   CITY POLICIES
         
37.   EMERGENCY SERVICES, ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Meetings
   
30.02   Compensation
   
30.03   Council member elections by district
§ 30.01 MEETINGS.
   Meetings of the Council shall be held in the building known as the "City
Hall," located on the northwest corner of the intersection of Third Street and
Santa Fe Street, and all regular meetings shall be held at such times as the
Council shall fix by resolution, provided, however, that in the event the
Council Chambers of the City Hall cannot be used temporarily as a meeting place
for the City Council or in the event that attendance is expected to exceed the
capacity of the Council Chamber, then and in that event City Council meetings
shall be held in the Community Center, located at 3600 Santa Fe Street,
Riverbank, California. Notice that the City Council meetings are being held
temporarily in the Community Center shall be given by posting a notice to that
effect on or near the Council Chambers door prior to the meetings. The City
Council may hold additional meetings as it may deem necessary at any other
place authorized by law.
(`67 Code, §1-6-1) (Ord. 77-16, passed 8-8-77; Am. Ord. 2008-010, passed 10-13-
08)
§ 30.02 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Purpose. This section is enacted pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 36516,
authorizing the Council to provide by ordinance that each member of the Council
shall receive a prescribed salary.
   (B)   Salaries. Commencing on the operative date of this section members of
the Council of the city shall receive, as salary, the sum of $900 per month and
the Mayor $950 per month, as prescribed in Cal. Gov't Code § 36516 for cities
up to and including 35,000 in population, which shall be payable from and after
the operative date in this section at the same time and in the same manner as
the salaries are paid to other officers and employees of the city.
   (C)   Change in compensation. Any change in compensation may only be made
effective whenever one or more members of the City Council begins a new term of
office.
   (D)   Reimbursement. The salaries prescribed herein are and shall be
exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the Council of reimbursement
for actual and necessary expenses incurred by him in the performance of
official duties for the city.
(`67 Code, § 1-6-2) (Ord. 86-01, passed 1-27-86; Am. Ord. 2004-11, passed 12-
13-04; Am. Ord. 2008-010, passed 10-13-08; Am. Ord. 2024- 002, passed 1-23-24)
§ 30.03 COUNCIL MEMBER ELECTIONS BY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Method of election of the members of the City Council. The elective
officers of the city shall be a Mayor and four Council members. The Council
shall consist of the Mayor and four Council members, each of whom, including
the Mayor, shall have the right to vote on all questions coming before the
Council.
      (1)   Council members. Each member of the Council shall serve a four year
term until his or her successor is elected and qualified. Members of the
Council shall be elected “by-district” and each district shall elect one
Council member. Only voters who live in a district shall be eligible to vote in
the election for Council member of that district. Except as provided in
division (B)(2) of this section, the Council member elected to represent a
district must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that
district, and any candidate for the Council must live in, and be a registered
voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election. Termination of
residency in a district by a Council member shall create an immediate vacancy
for that Council district unless a substitute residence within the district is
established within 30 days of the termination of residency.
      (2)   Mayor. The term of office of the Mayor shall be four years until
his or her successor is elected and qualified. The Mayor shall be elected by
the voters of the city at-large at each general municipal election, or as
otherwise provided by law. The Mayor shall be a resident of the city. The Mayor
in office at the time this section takes effect shall continue in office until
the expiration of the full term to which he or she was elected and until his or
her successor is elected and qualified.
   (B)   Establishment of Council member districts. Beginning with the general
municipal election in November 2016, members of the Council shall be elected on
a "by-district" basis from four Council member districts.
      (1)   Boundaries and numbering of each district.
         (a)   Each Council member district shall be assigned a district
number, with districts numbered one through four. The boundaries and the number
of each of the four electoral districts for the Council are set forth by City
Council resolution, including a map of the districts, which is incorporated
herein by reference. The electoral districts may be subsequently reapportioned
as provided by state law. The Council members of the two even-numbered
districts shall be elected by-district in November 2016 for a term of four
years.
         (b)   The Council members of the two odd-numbered districts shall be
elected by-district in November 2018 for a term of four years. After the
adoption of this section all persons appointed to fill vacancies on the Council
and all persons elected to fill vacancies on the Council at a special municipal
election shall reside within the district to which they are appointed or
elected.
      (2)   Technical changes to Council districts. If necessary to facilitate
the implementation of this section, the City Clerk is authorized to make
technical adjustments to the district boundaries that do not substantively
affect the populations in the districts, the eligibility of candidates, or the
residence of elected officials within any district. The City Clerk shall advise
the Council of any such adjustments that are found to be required in the
implementation of the district.
      (3)   Amendment of district boundaries. Pursuant to Cal. Elections Code §
21601, as it may be amended, the Council shall adjust the boundaries of any or
all of the districts following each decennial federal census. Using the census
as a basis, the Council shall adjust the boundaries so that the districts shall
be as nearly equal in population as practicable and in compliance with all
applicable provisions of law. Any adjustment of district boundaries shall be
made by resolution adopted by the Council before the first day of November of
the year following the year in which each decennial federal census is taken.
Prior to the public hearing approving the adjustment of the district
boundaries, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
district boundaries as required by Cal. Elections Code § 21601.
      (4)   Transition period. A period of transition from at-large elections
to by-district elections will occur from the time of adoption of the first
districting plan to the time that the by-district elections are held for all
Council member districts. During this period of transition, each Council member
elected at-large in the regular municipal election of November 2014 will be
designated by the Council as the Council member representing one of Districts
One and Three in the districting plan whether or not that Council member
resides in the district. The first by-district elections for Districts Two and
Four shall occur during the regular municipal election in November 2016. The
first by-district elections for Districts One and Three shall occur during the
regular municipal election In November 2018, Nothing contained herein shall
prevent an incumbent Council member at the time of the effective date of this
section from running for a Council district in which that Council member
resides other than the district for which that member currently holds office,
if the Council member is otherwise eligible to run in that district and vacates
the office of Council member for the district of non-residency if elected. No
Council member may hold office in more than one district. Each incumbent
Council member elected at-large shall be allowed to complete the term for which
they were elected regardless of the district of residency so long as they
otherwise remain eligible to hold the office and have not been removed for
cause or elected to another office.
(Ord. 2015-019, passed 12-8-15)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   Compensation to be fixed by Council
   
31.02   Bonds required of Clerk and Treasurer
   
31.03   City Manager
   
31.04   Assistant City Manager
   
31.05   Director of Finance
§ 31.01 COMPENSATION TO BE FIXED BY COUNCIL.
   The compensation of all officers and employees of the city shall be fixed by
the Council by resolution.
(`67 Code, § 1-7-1) (Ord. 45, passed 3-29-38; Am. Ord. 2008-011, passed 10-13-
08)
§ 31.02 BONDS REQUIRED OF CLERK AND TREASURER.
   The City Clerk and the City Treasurer shall each give a bond in an amount
recommended by the City Attorney and fixed by the City Council for the faithful
performance of the duties of their respective offices, as provided by law.
(`67 Code, § 1-7-3) (Ord. 79-9, passed 12-10-79; Am. Ord. 2008-011, passed 10-
13-08)
§ 31.03 CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   Position created. Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 34851, the City
Council does hereby adopt the City Manager form of government. Wherever the
term City Administrator appears in this code, it shall be construed to mean and
include the term City Manager. The City Manager shall be appointed by the
Council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualification
and ability, and shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the Council.
(`67 Code, § 1-5-1) (Ord. 85-08, passed 7-22-85)
   (B)   Eligibility. Any person appointed to this position shall reside within
a reasonable distance to the city, pursuant to California's Constitution
Article XI § 10(b). No person elected or appointed to membership on the Council
shall, subsequent to such election or appointment, be eligible for appointment
as City Manager until one year has elapsed after he has ceased to be a member
of the Council.
(`67 Code, § 1-5-2)
   (C)   Bond. The City Manager shall secure a corporate surety bond to be
approved by the Council in such sum as may be determined by the Council and
shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the
City Manager as herein prescribed. Bond fee to be paid by the city.
(`67 Code, § 1-5-3)
   (D)   Absence. In case of an absence, disability or suspension of the City
Manager, the Assistant City Manager shall perform the duties of the City
Manager during this period of absence, disability, or suspension of the City
Manager. During this time, the Assistant City Manager will receive a step
increase in his or her base salary, or in the event the Assistant City Manager
is at the top step, he or she shall receive a 5% base salary increase during
the duration in which he or she is performing the duties of a City Manager.
(`67 Code, § 1-5-4) (Ord. 228, passed 7-9-56; Am. Ord. 85-08, passed 7-22-85)
   (E)   Appointment; removal. The City Council shall appoint the City Manager
for an indefinite term and may remove him or her at any time by a three member
vote of the City Council. The City Manager serves at the pleasure of the City
Council and can be removed from office according to the terms and conditions
set forth in his or her employment agreement.
(`67 Code, § 1-5-5) (Ord. 68-5, passed 10-28-68)
   (F)   Removal after municipal election. Notwithstanding the provisions of
this chapter, the City Manager shall not be removed from office during or
within a period of 90 days next succeeding any general municipal election held
in the city which a member of the City Council is elected; the purpose of this
provision is to allow any newly elected member to the City Council or a
reorganized City Council to observe the actions and ability of the City Manager
in the performance of the powers and duties of his or her office. After the
expiration of the 90-day period, the provisions of division (E), above,
pertaining to the removal of the City Manager shall be effective.
(`67 Code, § 1-5-6)
   (G)   Compensation. The City Manager, or such person designated to perform
his or her duties as provided in division (D) above shall receive such
compensation as the City Council shall from time to time determine and fix, and
the compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city that
the City Council shall designate. Additional compensation may be provided to
the City Manager as determined by his or her employment agreement.
(`67 Code, § 1-5-7)
   (H)   Powers; duties. The City Manager shall be the administrative head of
the city government under the direction and control of the City Council, except
as otherwise provided. He or she shall be responsible for the effective
administration of all the affairs of the city, which are under his or her
control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, not
as a limitation thereof, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have
the power:
      (1)   To accept full responsibility for all city activities, programs,
and services, including directing the development and implementation of goals,
objectives, policies, and procedures; and ensure that established goals and
priorities are achieved.
      (2)   To provide advice and consultation to the City Council on the
development and implementation of city programs and services.
      (3)   To direct and participate in the preparation and administration of
the city budget; prepare and submit to the City Council reports of finances and
administrative activities; keep Council advised of financial conditions,
program progress, and present and future needs of the city.
      (4)   To review and evaluate program service delivery methods and systems
within the city, including administrative and support systems and internal
relationships; identify opportunities for improvement and implement changes to
standard operating procedures to enhance services.
      (5)   To coordinate the preparation of the agenda for the City Council;
address the City Council on behalf of city staff; represent the City Council to
employees, community groups, individual members of the public, and other
governmental agencies; and respond to the most difficult complaints and
requests for information.
      (6)   To direct the implementation, maintenance and enforcement of city
personnel policies and practices as prescribed by the City Council; direct
staff or serve as the chief negotiator in labor relations activities; select,
supervise, train, and evaluate assigned staff.
      (7)   To work with the Assistant City Manager to confer with department
heads and managers concerning administrative and operational problems, work
plans, and strategic plans; make appropriate decisions or recommendations; and
oversee the preparation and implementation of long-range plans for the city.
      (8)   To serve as a resource for the City Council, department personnel,
city staff, other organizations and the public; and coordinate pertinent
information, resources, and work-teams necessary to support a positive and
productive environment.
      (9)   To perform all duties as prescribed by City Council actions; and
direct the preparation of plans and specifications for work, which the City
Council requests.
      (10)   To attend and participate in professional and community meetings
as necessary; stay current on issues relative to public administration and
relative service delivery responsibilities; respond to and resolve sensitive
and complex community and organizational inquiries, issues, and complaints; and
establish and maintain a customer services orientation within the city
organization.
      (11)   To establish positive working relationships with representatives
of community organizations, state/local agencies and associations, city
management and staff, and the public.
      (12)   To appoint and remove any officers and employees of the city,
except elected officers and their respective staffs.
      (13)   To attend all meetings of the City Council, unless excused by the
City Council, except when his or her removal is under consideration by the City
Council at a closed session of the City Council.
(Ord. 2008-011, passed 10-13-08; Am. Ord. 2017-001, passed 1-10-17)
§ 31.04 ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   Position created. The office of Assistant City Manager is hereby
created and established.
   (B)   Bond. The Assistant City Manager shall, before entering upon the
duties of his or her office, execute a bond to the city, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his or her duties, in an amount to be fixed from time
to time by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Compensation. The Assistant City Manager shall receive as compensation
such salary as the City Council from time to time fixed by resolution or
through an employment agreement. Additional compensation may be provided to the
Assistant City Manager as determined by his or her employment agreement.
   (D)   Powers and duties. The Assistant City Manager shall perform all duties
of his or her office pursuant to state law, the ordinances of the city, and
such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the City
Manager and City Council. In addition, the Assistant City Manager shall have
the duty and power:
      (1)   To provide assistance and support to the City Manager, develop
programs, policies and plans related to all facets of city government in
coordination with the City Manager.
      (2)   To assist with the coordination of the annual budget process.
      (3)   To recommend, implement and administer internal department policies
and procedures.
      (4)   To ensure city policies, procedures, and rules are followed.
      (5)   To assist the City Manager in developing recommendations on a wide
variety of municipal programs and issues.
      (6)   To prepare reports and correspondence for the City Council or
outside agencies as required.
      (7)   To attend City Council meetings as requested by the City Manager.
      (8)   To represent the City Manager at various meetings or other
functions in his or her absence at the City Manager’s discretion.
      (9)   To act in the absence of the City Manager as set forth in §
31.04(E).
   (E)   Absence of City Manager. The Assistant City Manager shall perform all
duties of the City Manager, enumerated in §
31.03 of this Code, in the event the City Manager separates from employment
with the city or is otherwise unable to perform his or her duties.
   (F)   Appointment; removal. The City Manager shall appoint the Assistant
City Manager. The Assistant City Manager serves at the pleasure of the City
Manager and can be removed from office according to the terms and conditions as
set forth in his or her employment agreement.
(Ord. 2017-001, passed 1-10-17)
§ 31.05 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   (A)   Office created. The office of Director of Finance is hereby created
and established.
(`67 Code, § 1-13-1)
   (B)   Bond. The Director of Finance shall, before entering upon the duties
of his or her office, execute a bond to the city, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his duties, in an amount to be fixed from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.
(`67 Code, § 1-13-2)
   (C)   Compensation. The Director of Finance shall receive as compensation
such salary as the City Council shall from time to time fix by resolution.
(`67 Code, § 1-13-3)
   (D)   Powers and duties. The Director of Finance shall perform all duties of
his office by state law, the ordinances of the city, and such other duties not
in conflict therewith as may be required by the City Manager and the City
Council. In addition, the Director of Finance shall have the following powers
and duties:
      (1)   Administration of financial affairs. Have charge of the
administration of the financial affairs of the city.
      (2)   Budget. Compile annual fiscal year budget expense and income
estimates for the city and submit them to the City Manager by April 15 for the
following fiscal year beginning July 1.
      (3)   Accounting system. Maintain a general accounting system for the
city government and each of the offices, departments and agencies thereof.
      (4)   Disbursements. Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of
all money; audit all purchase orders; audit all bills, invoices, payrolls,
demands and other charges against the city government before submission to the
City Council for approval.
      (5)   Financial reports. Submit to the City Manager and City Council a
monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to
show the exact financial condition of the city; and, as of the end of each
fiscal year, submit a complete financial statement and report.
      (6)   Property inventory. Supervise the keeping of current inventories of
all property of the city by all city departments, offices and agencies.
      (7)   Demands for money. Demand and receive all monies and fees owing to
the city whenever any person is indebted to the city in any manner, when the
means of collection of such debt is not otherwise provided for by law.
      (8)   Collection of utility accounts, fees, and the like. Supervise the
collection and billing of water, sewer and garbage accounts, bicycle license
fees, dog license fees, building permit fees, and all other miscellaneous
income receipts to the city.
      (9)   Preparation and issuance of business licenses. Preparation of city
business licenses and the supervision of the issuance of business licenses and
the collection of fees therefor.
      (10)   Other functions. To perform such other functions as the City
Manager may from time to time specify or such other functions as may be
prescribed from time to time by action of the City Council.
(`67 Code, § 1-13-4)
   (E)   Duties transferred from City Clerk. The Director of Finance shall
perform all the financial and accounting duties heretofore imposed upon the
City Clerk, and the City Clerk shall be and hereby is relieved of all such
duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Cal. Gov't Code §§ 37700 et seq. and §§
40802 through 40805.
(`67 Code, § 1-13-5) (Ord. 84-01, passed 2-27-84; Am. Ord. 2008-011, passed 10-
13-08; Am. Ord. 2017-001, passed 1-10-17)
Statutory reference:
   Transfer of duties authorized, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 37209 and 40805.5
CHAPTER 32: CITY BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   General
   
32.02   Membership
   
32.03   Appointments
   
32.04   Term of office
   
32.05   Vacancy
   
32.06   Powers, duties, and responsibilities
   
32.07   Meetings; bylaws; rules and procedures
   
32.08   Dissolution of boards, commissions, or committees
Industrial Development Authority
   
32.20   Purposes
   
32.21   Findings
   
32.22   Declarations
   
32.23   Dissolution of the authority
Planning Commission
   
32.30   Commission established
   
32.31   Membership and terms of office
   
32.32   Compensation
   
32.33   Meetings; rules and procedures
   
32.34   Staff support
   
32.35   Powers and duties
Environmental Review Committee
   
32.45   Established; compensation
   
32.46   Terms of office
   
32.47   Meetings; quorum
   
32.48   Records
   
32.49   Duties; powers; responsibilities
   
32.50   Environmental Impact Report preparation thresholds
   
32.51   City responsibility for environmental assessment
   
32.52   Guidelines; California Environmental Quality Act
   
32.53   Appeals
   
32.54   Fees
   
32.55   Effect
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 GENERAL.
   (A)   Boards, commissions, and committees shall be established by the City
Council and shall have powers and duties as established herein, by resolution,
or state statute. The City Council may create by resolution special committees
and such temporary ad hoc committees as in its judgment are required or deemed
necessary to render advice or recommendations to the City Council on subject
matters within its jurisdiction.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided by law, ordinance, or resolution, all
actions of the boards, commissions, and committees may be subject to the
review, modification, and approval by the City Council.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.02 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The members of boards, commissions, and committees shall be appointed
as established herein, unless otherwise stated by law, ordinance, or
resolution. Notwithstanding the provisions of §§
32.45 et seq., voting members shall not be elected officials of the city; nor
shall any member be employed by the City of Riverbank government. In order to
be eligible for appointment to such bodies, a person shall be a qualified
registered elector of the City of Riverbank. Under special circumstances, as
deemed necessary, an owner of a business located within the city limits may
serve as a member. In no event shall less than a majority of any board,
commission, or committee be made up of qualified registered electors of the
city.
   (B)   Removal. Any member of a board, commission, or committee may be
removed from office at any time, with or without cause, by a majority vote of
the City Council, except in cases where the Mayor or City Council are not the
appointing authority (in which cases such regular appointing authority may
exercise this power of removal).
   (C)   Unless otherwise specifically provided by the action establishing the
body or appointing its initial members, the City Council at its discretion may
limit the number of citizen advisory bodies a person may serve on
simultaneously.
   (D)   Attendance. All members appointed must be active participants in order
for the board, commission, or committee to function effectively and accomplish
its goals. Members must notify the secretary or designated recorder at least 24
hours in advance if he or she is unable to attend a meeting. If a member is
absent from three regular, opened meetings, without cause or notice, or from
25% of the duly annual regularly scheduled opened meetings, the membership
shall thereupon become vacant and shall be filled as any other vacancy.
   (E)   Compliance with state requirements. Members of boards, commissions,
and committees, shall comply with applicable state laws that govern mandatory
training courses, conflict of interest declarations and Political Reform Act
requirements, the Ralph M. Brown Act requirements, and other provisions of laws
as required. Noncompliance shall be cause for removal.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.03 APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov. Code § 40605 the Mayor, with the approval of the
City Council, shall make all appointments to boards, commissions, and
committees for staggered terms, unless otherwise specifically provided by
statute, ordinance, or resolution.
   (B)   Alternate member. The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council,
may appoint one or two alternate members to each board, commission, or
committee to serve a staggered two-year term. During their term as such, the
alternate(s) shall have all of the powers and duties of a regular member except
his or her right to vote shall only be allowed and have legal effect when he or
she is seated as an acting member of the board, commission, or committee in the
absence of a regular member.
      (1)   The alternate member shall attend the scheduled meetings. An
alternate member shall take measures to be prepared to serve in the absence of
a regular member by ensuring his or her review and comprehension of reports or
documents on subject matters, and by ensuring his or her familiarity with
previous actions taken and discussions conducted on matters of consideration.
      (2)   Compensation for alternate member. Compensation for an alternate
member shall be 50% of the compensation received by a regular member for
attendance of an opened meeting. When an alternate member takes the place of a
regular member, the alternate shall be paid the full amount normally received
by the regular member.
      (3)   If multiple alternate appointments are made to a board, commission,
or committee, they shall be designated by sequential numbering to establish the
order of who will be called upon to serve (i.e., Alternate-1; Alternate-2).
      (4)   In the event one or more interim vacancies on a board, commission,
or committee occurs, an alternate member, by order of number assigned if
multiple alternate positions exist, shall by City Council resolution, assume
the unexpired portion of the term vacated and shall serve as a regular member.
      (5)   A new alternate may be recruited pursuant to §
32.05 of this chapter to fill the unexpired term vacated, and may be
reappointed as an alternate without the conduct of a recruitment on a one time
basis to fulfill a new two-year term.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.04 TERM OF OFFICE.
   Members of a board, commission, or committee shall serve at the pleasure of
the City Council for staggered year terms as set by statute, ordinance, or
resolution.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.05 VACANCY.
   (A)   Scheduled vacancy. Whenever a scheduled vacancy occurs due to an
expired term, a recruitment process shall be conducted in accordance with any
resolution establishing the terms of office and procedures by which to fill
vacancies. The recruitment procedures shall be no less than by posting a
special vacancy notice in the City Clerk’s Office, city exterior public
building boards, the city website and social media links, and published in a
local newspaper, within 20 days after the vacancy occurs. A final appointment
to the board, committee, or commission to fill the vacancy shall not be made
for at least ten working days after posting of the notice.
   (B)   Unscheduled vacancy.
      (1)   Whenever an unscheduled vacancy occurs on a board, commission, or
committee whether due to resignation, removal, or other cause, a vacancy may be
filled pursuant to §
32.03 of this chapter if an alternate member exists.
      (2)   When no alternate member exists to fill an unscheduled vacancy, a
recruitment process shall be conducted pursuant to §
32.05(A).
   (C)   If the City Council determines that an emergency exists, it may fill
an unscheduled vacancy immediately. Persons appointed to fill vacancies shall
serve on an acting basis until final appointment is made, and in no event
longer than the unexpired term.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.06 POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The powers, duties, and responsibilities of a board, commission, or
committee shall be specified herein or by adoption of a City Council resolution
that establishes its bylaws or its rules and procedures.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.07 MEETINGS; BYLAWS; RULES AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise already provided by law, ordinance, or resolution, a
board, commission, and committee shall by City Council resolution adopt bylaws
or rules and procedures to establish and govern its powers, duties, and
responsibilities; terms of service; compensation; and other matters that
constitutes its organization and its order and conduct of a public meeting and
transaction of public business.
   (B)   The bylaws or rules and procedures shall include compliance with
applicable state laws that govern mandatory training courses, conflict of
interest declarations and Political Reform Act requirements, the Ralph M. Brown
Act requirements, and other provisions of laws as required.
   (C)   The bylaws or rules and procedures must be consistent with the
Riverbank municipal code and applicable state laws. Any amendments to the
bylaws or rules and procedures shall be made by resolution.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.08 DISSOLUTION OF BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, OR COMMITTEES.
   Unless otherwise stated by statute or ordinance a board, commission, or
committee that has served its purpose shall be abolished by City Council
resolution.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 32.20 PURPOSES.
   (A)   The California Industrial Development Financing Act, Cal. Gov't Code
§§ 91500 et seq. (the “Act”), has established in the city, a public
instrumentality of the State of California known as the Industrial Development
Authority of the city of Riverbank, for the purpose of exercising powers
granted by the Act.
   (B)   The public purposes are to increase opportunities for useful
employment or otherwise contribute to economic development.
   (C)   The sole purpose of an authority is to undertake projects through the
issuance of tax-exempt bonds in accomplishment of the purposes provided in the
Act and to carry out and complete such projects and perform and exercise
derivative obligations and powers.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.21 FINDINGS.
   The need for the establishment of an Industrial Development Authority is
based upon findings that industry requires an alternative method of low-cost
capital financing, that such an authority can provide, in order for it to
undertake the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of facilities which
will serve public purposes.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.22 DECLARATIONS.
   (A)   Need. There is a need in the city for an Industrial Development
Authority to provide industry with an alternative and additional method of
financing capital projects with specified public purposes by the issuance of
tax-exempt industrial development bonds in accordance with state policy as set
forth in the Act.
   (B)   Organization.
      (1)   The industrial development authority of this city established by
the Act is hereby declared organized and shall function under the name
“Industrial Development Authority of the City of Riverbank,” and shall meet on
an as needed basis. The Authority shall be authorized to transact business and
exercise all of the powers and other authority conferred upon industrial
development authorities in such Act.
      (2)   Pursuant to the Act, the City Council may appoint a board of
directors of an Industrial Development Authority, or may by resolution declare
itself to be the board in which case all the rights, powers, privileges,
duties, liabilities, disabilities, and immunities vested in a board shall be
vested in the governing body.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.23 DISSOLUTION OF THE AUTHORITY.
   Whenever the governing body shall declare that there is no longer a need for
an authority, and the authority shall no longer function, the dissolution of
the authority shall occur in the manner as indicated pursuant to the Act.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 32.30 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to Chapter 3, Title 7 of the California Government Code, A Planning
Commission is hereby established in and for the City of Riverbank.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.31 MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall consist of five voting members who shall
serve four-year terms of office, and one alternate member who shall serve a
two-year term of office, all of whom shall be residents and registered voters
of the City of Riverbank. In accordance with §
32.03 of this chapter:
      (1)   The Mayor with the approval of the City Council may appoint an
additional alternate member as deemed necessary.
      (2)   Alternate members shall be prepared to serve in the absence of a
regular member when called upon.
   (B)   The provisions of membership in §
32.02 of the chapter shall apply. Notwithstanding §
32.02(A), all members shall be residents and electors of the City of Riverbank.
The members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the City
Council.
   (C)   At the first opened meeting of a new year, the Planning Commission
shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its appointed
members, in accordance with its established rules and procedures. The term of
these offices shall be for one year. These officers shall perform such duties
as required by any law, ordinance, or resolution.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.32 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Compensation may be provided. Any amount of compensation provided
shall be fixed by City Council resolution and may be changed from time to time.
   (B)   Alternate member compensation. Compensation for alternate member shall
be 50% of the compensation received by a regular member for attendance of an
opened meeting. When an alternate member takes the place of a regular member,
the alternate shall be paid the full amount normally received by the regular
member.
   (C)   The members shall receive reasonable compensation for expenses
incurred to attend requested training sessions or to perform their duties.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.33 MEETINGS; RULES AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall meet at least once a month at such time
and place as fixed by resolution.
   (B)   Regular or special meeting proceedings shall comply with the Ralph M.
Brown Act.
   (C)   In accordance with the provisions of §
32.07 of this chapter, the Planning Commission shall adopt rules and procedures
to participate as members of the commission and for the conduct of meetings and
transaction of business. Records of its resolutions, transactions, findings and
determinations shall be kept on file in accordance with the city’s records
retention schedule and shall be public records in accordance with the
California Public Records Act.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.34 STAFF SUPPORT.
   (A)   Staff support services shall be provided by the Community Development
Director or his or her designee, who shall be appointed by the City Manager
with the approval of the City Council.
   (B)   The Community Development Director or his or her designee shall act as
secretary to the Commission. In the absence of a Community Development
Director, the next level of authority of the city’s Planning Department, shall
serve as the secretary.
   (C)   The City Clerk or designated city staff may serve as recorder of the
proceedings.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.35 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission shall have the power and duties:
   (A)   To cause to be prepared and recommend for adoption a comprehensive
long term general plan for the physical development of the city, and of any
land outside its boundaries, as provided for by the conservation and planning
laws of the state. Such plan shall be known as the general plan of the city,
and may comprise any, all or any combination of the plans specified in Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 65300 et seq.
   (B)   To cause to be prepared plans based on the general plan and drafts of
such regulations, programs, and legislation as may, in its judgment, be
required for the systematic execution of the general plan and to recommend such
plans and measures to the City Council for adoption.
   (C)   To act as the advisory agency for the city in connection with the
administration of the Subdivision and Map Act of the state.
   (D)   To investigate and recommend to the City Council plans for the
improvement and beautification of the city, such as the opening, straightening,
widening, closing or parking of public streets; the location and improvement of
public buildings and public works.
   (E)   To perform the duties of Planning Commission required under Cal. Gov't
Code §§ 65000 et seq. and the Riverbank municipal code.
   (F)   To perform such other duties as may be imposed upon it by the City
Council by ordinance or resolution.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW COMMITTEE
§ 32.45 ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION.
   The Environmental Review Committee (ERC) of the city is established. The ERC
shall consist of the City Manager, the Director of Community Development, the
Director of Public Works, the Director of Parks and Recreation, and the Police
Chief, or their designated alternates. The Director of Community Development or
his or her designee shall serve as the Chairperson of the committee.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.46 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The terms of staff members are ongoing unless changed by action of the City
Council.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.47 MEETINGS; QUORUM.
   (A)   The ERC shall meet on an as needed basis to insure the timely review
of projects as defined by the California Environmental Quality Act.
   (B)   A majority of the ERC shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of
transacting the business of the committee.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.48 RECORDS.
   The ERC shall record the results of its proceedings and transactions and
shall share the opinions of the committee with the applicant or project
proponent. The opinions of the committee shall be disclosed in reports to the
Planning Commission and City Council as may be required.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.49 DUTIES; POWERS; RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   All discretionary projects which are not categorically exempt or
otherwise exempted from further environmental assessment, shall be forwarded to
the ERC for evaluation under the California Environmental Quality Act.
   (B)   The ERC shall evaluate the initial study of a proposed project to
determine whether the project may or may not have a significant effect on the
environment.
   (C)   If a determination is made that the project will not have a
significant impact on the environment, the ERC will recommend that the final
reviewing authority (decision-maker) grant a negative declaration.
   (D)   If a determination is made that the project may have a significant
impact on the environment, the ERC shall require preparation of an
environmental impact report (EIR). The major areas of concern, the selection of
the preparer, and the preparation of the EIR shall be coordinated by the
committee.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.50 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT PREPARATION THRESHOLDS.
   The ERC shall determine which projects require the preparation of an
environmental impact report, based on the magnitude or complexity of a project.
Unless it can be demonstrated through extensive technical studies that no
significant impacts are anticipated, the following projects are presumed to be
sufficiently large and/or complex so as to require the preparation of an
environmental impact report.
   (A)   Annexations over 150 acres;
   (B)   Commercial development projects proposing more than 1,000 square feet
of gross building floor area;
   (C)   Other development projects (i.e., tentative subdivision maps, specific
plans, general plan amendments, and the like) which contain more than 100 acres
or propose more than 200 dwelling units;
   (D)   Notwithstanding the above thresholds, projects involving significant
controversy or complexity may require the preparation of an environmental
impact report based on the findings of the ERC. Further, even if it is
determined that an environmental impact report is not necessary, an action or
approval by the city may still require a different environmental analysis under
the California Environmental Quality Act.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.51 CITY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   The city has responsibility for, and control over, the form, scope and
contents of all documents comprising environmental assessment of a project. All
reports, studies, or other documents prepared by or under direction of an
applicant, intended for inclusion in the environmental documents, shall be
clearly identified as "Proponent's Environmental Assessment" and shall set
forth in detail the assumptions, and methodologies supporting any conclusions
reached, or upon which any recommendations may be based.
   (B)   The ERC, at its sole discretion, may decide to utilize the services of
a private consulting firm to prepare or review all studies, reports, and other
documents required or permitted by the guidelines, including those submitted by
the proponent or any other party. In all cases, the consultant shall enter into
a contract with, and is responsible directly to, the city. All contract
services shall be performed to the satisfaction of the Environmental Review
Committee.
   (C)   All costs incurred in the preparation of the environmental documents,
including the costs of services performed under division (B) of this section
and costs incurred by the Environmental Review Committee, including city staff
time, shall be borne by the project proponent.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.52 GUIDELINES; CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT.
   (A)   As permitted by § 15022(d) of the Guidelines for California
Environmental Quality Act (Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 14, Chapter 3, §
15022(d) as promulgated by the California Natural Resources Agency and as
subsequently amended are adopted by this reference. Whenever any provisions of
the California Environmental Quality Act or the Guidelines for the California
Environmental Quality Act conflict with any provision of this chapter, the
California Environmental Quality Act and the Guidelines for the California
Environmental Quality Act shall supersede this chapter.
   (B)   The ERC shall review all notices of exemption for residential
development projects, within specific plan areas to insure that the project
implements and is consistent with the applicable specific plan and certified
environmental impact report. When making said determination the ERC shall take
into account all mitigation measures, mitigation monitoring program and
provisions of § 15162 of the Guidelines for the California Environmental
Quality Act (see Cal. Code of Regulations § 15162).
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.53 APPEALS.
   The project sponsor may appeal a decision to prepare an environmental impact
report to the Planning Commission. The appeal shall be filed in writing with
the City Clerk within five working days of the ERC’s decision. If the Planning
Commission determines that an environmental impact report is not necessary, the
project shall be returned to the ERC for further consideration.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.54 FEES.
   The City Council may, by resolution, establish an environmental assessment
fee.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
§ 32.55 EFFECT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as restricting or curtailing any
powers of the City Council, Planning Commission, or city officers.
(Ord. 2017-009, passed 9-26-17)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Gas Tax Improvement Fund
Purchasing
   
33.10   Adoption of purchasing system
   
33.11   Purchasing Officer
   
33.12   Authority
   
33.13   Exemptions from centralized purchasing
   
33.14   Requisitions and purchase orders
   
33.15   Encumbrance of funds
   
33.16   Bidding
   
33.17   Formal contract procedure
   
33.18   Open market procedure
   
33.19   Inspection and testing
   
33.20   Contracting for professional services
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 GAS TAX IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   (A)   To comply with the provisions of the Cal. Sts. & High. Code, the
special fund of the city known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund”
heretofore established and maintained by the city as a special fund as required
by the provisions of Cal. Sts. & High. Code, § 2113, and other sections, shall
continue as a special fund of the city.
(`67 Code, § 3-7-1)
   (B)   All monies received by the city from the Highway Users Tax Fund of the
State of California shall be deposited in the special fund and all monies in
the special fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by
and subject to all of the provisions of Cal. Sts. & High. Code, §§ 2100 et seq.
and related statutes.
(`67 Code, § 3-7-2) (Ord. 67-8, passed 11-1-67)
PURCHASING
§ 33.10 ADOPTION OF PURCHASING SYSTEM.
   In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and
equipment, to secure for the city supplies and equipment at the lowest possible
cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control
over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to
assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is hereby adopted.
(`67 Code, § 1-8-1)
§ 33.11 PURCHASING OFFICER.
   There is hereby created the position of Purchasing Officer. He shall be
appointed by the Council. The duties of Purchasing Officer may be combined with
those of any other office or position.
(`67 Code, § 1-8-2)
§ 33.12 AUTHORITY.
   The Purchasing Officer shall have authority to:
   (A)   Purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any using
agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this subchapter,
such administrative regulations as the Purchasing Officer shall adopt and such
other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the Council.
   (B)   Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of
supplies and equipment.
   (C)   Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies and
equipment at least expense to the city.
   (D)   Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open
competition as possible on all purchases.
   (E)   Prepare and recommend to the Council rules governing the purchase of
supplies and equipment for the city.
   (F)   Prepare and recommend to the Council revisions and amendments to the
purchasing rules.
   (G)   Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing,
prices, market conditions and new products.
   (H)   Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the
operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations.
   (J)   Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to
insure conformance with specifications.
   (K)   Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment
between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which
cannot be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for city use.
   (L)   Maintain a bidders list, vendors catalog file and records needed for
the efficient operation of the Purchasing Department.
(`67 Code, § 1-8-3)
§ 33.13 EXEMPTIONS FROM CENTRALIZED PURCHASING.
   The Purchasing Officer with approval of the Council may authorize, in
writing, any agency to purchase or contract for specified supplies and
equipment independently of the Purchasing Department; but he shall require that
such purchases or contracts shall be made in conformity with the procedures
established by this subchapter and shall further require periodic reports from
the agency on the purchases and contracts made under such written
authorization.
(`67 Code, § 1-8-4)
§ 33.14 REQUISITIONS AND PURCHASE ORDERS.
   (A)   Using agencies shall submit requests for supplies and equipment to the
Purchasing Officer by standard requisition forms.
(`67 Code, § 1-8-5)
   (B)   Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be made only by purchase
order.
(`67 Code, § 1-8-7)
§ 33.15 ENCUMBRANCE OF FUNDS.
   Except in cases of emergency, the Purchasing Officer shall not issue any
purchase order for supplies or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered
appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged.
(`67 Code, § 1-8-8) (Ord. 236, passed 4-28-58)
§ 33.16 BIDDING.
   (A)   Informal and formal bidding procedures. Public projects, as defined by
Cal. Public Contract Code § 22002, and in accordance with the monetary limits
described in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22032 (as amended from time to time by
the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission), shall be let
to contract by procedures described in Cal. Public Contract Code §§ 22030 et
seq.
   (B)   Procedures not established by the Act. When the Act does not establish
a procedure for bidding public projects, the procedures described in this
section and/or Cal. Public Contract Code §§ 20160 et seq. shall govern.
   (C)   Contractors list. Lists of contractors shall be developed and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Public Contract Code §
22034 and criteria promulgated from time to time by the Commission.
   (D)   Award to low bidder; no bids.  
      (1)   All contracts must be awarded to the lowest bidder.
      (2)   If two or more bids are the same and lowest, the city may perform
public projects with city employees or through a negotiated contract without
further compliance with this section.
   (E)   Notice inviting informal bids.  
      (1)   Preparation of notice. When a public project anticipated to fall
within the monetary limits on informal bids described in Cal. Public Contract
Code § 22032 (as amended from time to time by the Commission) is to be
performed, the city shall prepare a notice of the opportunity to bid, which
describes the project in general terms, states the time and place for the
submission of bids, and describes how to obtain more detailed information about
the project.
      (2)   Mailing of notice.
         (a)   The city shall mail the notice to all contractors for the
category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with
division (C).
         (b)   It may also be mailed to all construction trade journals, as
specified by the Commission in accordance with Cal. Public Contract Code §
22036.
         (c)   Other contractors and/or construction trade journals may also be
notified at the discretion of the department soliciting bids.
         (d)   Mailing shall be completed at least ten days before bids are
due.
   (F)   Award of informally bid contracts. The City Manager, Public Works
Director or Finance Director are authorized to award informal contracts as
defined in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22032, except those described in
division (M).
   (G)   Bids exceed informal bidding limit. If all informal bids received
exceed the monetary limits on informal bids described in Cal. Public Contract
Code § 22032 (as amended from time to time by the Commission), and the city
determines that the cost estimate was reasonable, the city may award the
contract at up to the limit described in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22034(f),
by resolution approved by a four-fifths vote of the City Council.
   (H)   Bid documents for formal bids. The City Council shall adopt plans,
specifications and working details for all public projects anticipated to fall
outside the monetary limits on informal bids described in Cal. Public Contract
Code § 22032 (as amended from time to time by the Commission).
   (I)   Notice inviting formal bids.  
      (1)   Preparation of notice. When a public project anticipated to fall
outside the monetary limits on informal bids described in Cal. Public Contract
Code § 22032 (as amended from time to time by the Commission) is to be
performed, the city shall publish a notice inviting formal bids in a newspaper
of general circulation as described in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22037.
      (2)   Mailing of notice. 
         (a)   The notice shall also be mailed to all construction trade
journals, as specified by the Commission in accordance with Cal. Public
Contract Code § 22036.
         (b)   Other contractors and/or construction trade journals may also be
notified, at the discretion of the department soliciting bids.
         (c)   Mailing shall be completed at least 30 days before bids are due.
   (J)   When contractors list has not been prepared; proprietary product or
service. Notwithstanding divisions (E) and (I):
      (1)   If the city has not prepared a list of contractors for the
particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be
sent to each of the construction trade journals specified by the Commission.
      (2)   If the product or service is proprietary in nature, such that it
can be legally obtained only from a certain contractor(s), the notice inviting
informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor(s).
   (K)   Contracts for maintenance and other work. Contracts for maintenance,
as defined by Cal. Public Contract Code § 22002, and for any other work that
does not fall within that section's definition of public projects, may be bid
pursuant to the informal bidding procedures described in division (E), and the
formal bidding procedures in division (I).
   (L)   Rejection of bids; re-solicitation; use of city employees. 
      (1)   If the city intends to reject all bids, it must mail the apparent
low bidder a written notice of the city's intent to reject the bid, at least
two business days prior to the hearing at which the bids will be considered.
      (2)   After rejecting all bids, the city may:
         (a)   Abandon the project;
         (b)   Readvertise the project; or
         (c)   Perform the work with city employees, after a four-fifths
majority of City Council has passed a resolution, declaring that the project
can be performed more economically by city employees.
   (M)   Emergency procedures. When an emergency necessitates repair or
replacement, contracts shall be awarded pursuant to the procedures described in
Cal. Public Contract Code §§ 22035 and 22050.
   (N)   Uniform cost accounting procedures. Whenever the city uses its own
employees to perform a public works or maintenance project valued at more than
the monetary limit on informal bidding projects described in Cal. Public
Contract Code § 22032 (as amended from time to time by the Commission), it must
implement the uniform construction cost accounting policies and procedures
described in Cal. Public Contract Code §§ 22043 et seq. and the Commission's
policies and procedures manual.
(`67 Code, § 1-8-6) (Am. Ord. 2002-002, passed 1-28-02; Am. Ord. 2006-006,
passed 4-10-06)
§ 33.17 FORMAL CONTRACT PROCEDURE.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases and contracts for supplies
and equipment of estimated value greater than $30,000 shall be by written
contract with the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure
prescribed herein.
   (A)   Notice inviting bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a general
description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and
specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids.
      (1)   Published notice. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least
ten days before the date of opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at
least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the
city or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places in
the city that have been designated by §
36.05 as places for posting public notices.
      (2)   Bidders' list. The Purchasing Officer shall also solicit sealed
bids from all responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders'
list or who have requested their names to be added thereto.
      (3)   Bulletin board. The Purchasing Officer shall also advertise pending
purchases by a notice posted on a public bulletin board in the City Hall.
   (B)   Bidder's security. When deemed necessary by the Purchasing Officer,
bidder's security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids.
Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security, provided that a successful
bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the
contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed,
unless the city is responsible for the delay. The Council may, on refusal or
failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next
lowest responsible bidder. If the Council awards the contract to the next
lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by
the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and
the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.
   (C)   Bid opening procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the
Purchasing Officer and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall
be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A
tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during
regular business hours for a period of not less than 30 calendar days after the
bid opening.
   (D)   Rejection of bids. In its discretion the Council may reject any and
all bids presented and re-advertise for bids.
   (E)   Award of contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the Council to the
lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided herein.
   (F)   Tie bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount
or unit price, quality and service being equal and if the public interest will
not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the Council may accept the one
it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders at
the time of the bid opening.
   (G)   Performance bonds. The Council shall have authority to require a
performance bond before entering a contract in such amount as it shall find
reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the Council
requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described
in the notice inviting bids.
(`67 Code, § 1-8-9) (Ord. 236, passed 4-28-58; Am. Ord. 70-2, passed 1-26-70;
Am. Ord. 2002-002, passed 1-28-02; Am. Ord. 2008-012, passed 10-13-08)
§ 33.18 OPEN MARKET PROCEDURE.
   Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value in the amount of
$30,000 or less may be made by the Purchasing Officer in the open market
without observing the procedure prescribed by
§ 33.17.
   (A)   Minimum number of bids. Open market purchases shall, wherever
possible, be based on at least three bids and shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder.
   (B)   Notice inviting bids. The Purchasing Officer shall solicit bids by
written requests to prospective vendors, by telephone, and by public notice
posted on a public bulletin board in the City Hall.
   (C)   Written bids. Sealed written bids shall be submitted to the Purchasing
Officer who shall keep a record of all open market orders and bids for a period
of one year after the submission of bids or the placing of orders. This record
while so kept shall be open to public inspection.
(`67 Code, § 1-8-10) (Ord. 70-2, passed 1-26-70; Am. Ord. 2002-002, passed 1-
28-02; Am. Ord. 2008-012, passed 10-13-08)
§ 33.19 INSPECTION AND TESTING.
   The Purchasing Officer shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered to
determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or
contract. The Purchasing Officer shall have authority to require chemical and
physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which
are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications.
(`67 Code, § 1-8-11) (Ord. 236, passed 4-28-58)
§ 33.20 CONTRACTING FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
   (A)   Procurement of certain professional services. The services of certain
professions that involve extended analysis, the exercise of discretion and
independent judgment in their performance, and an advanced, specialized type of
knowledge, expertise, or training customarily acquired either by a prolonged
course of study or equivalent experience in the field, shall be procured in
accordance with the selection procedures specified in this section.
   (B)   Selection procedure.
      (1)   Conditions for use. Services provided under emergency procurements
are exempt from the requirements of this section.
      (2)   Statement of qualifications. Persons engaged in providing
professional services as described in division (A) of this section, may submit
statements of qualifications and expressions of interest in providing such
professional services.
      (3)   Public announcement and form of request for proposals. The City
Manager, or designee, through a request for qualifications, shall give adequate
notice of the need for such services.
      (4)   Discussions. The City Manager, or designee, may conduct discussions
with any consultant who has submitted an interest to determine such
consultant's qualifications for further consideration. Consultants shall be
accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for
discussion.
      (5)   Award. Award shall be made to the consultant determined in writing
to be best qualified based on the evaluation factors set forth in the request
for proposals, and negotiation of compensation determined to be fair and
reasonable.
(Ord. 2002-002, passed 1-28-02)
CHAPTER 34: TAXATION
Section
Property Transfer Tax
   
34.01   Title
   
34.02   Tax imposed; rate
   
34.03   Parties not liable
   
34.04   Application; conveyances
   
34.05   Securities and Exchange Commission
   
34.06   Partnership transfers
   
34.07   County Recorder to administer
   
34.08   Claims
Sales and Use Tax
   
34.20   Short title
   
34.21   Rate
   
34.22   Purpose
   
34.23   Contract with state
   
34.24   Sales tax
   
34.25   Place of sale
   
34.26   Use tax
   
34.27   Adoption of state law; limitations
   
34.28   Permit not required
   
34.29   Exclusions and exemptions
   
34.30   Amendments
   
34.31   Enjoining collection forbidden
   
34.32   Penalties
Transient Occupancy Tax
   
34.45   Title
   
34.46   Definitions
   
34.47   Tax imposed
   
34.48   Exemptions
   
34.49   Operator's duties
   
34.50   Registration
   
34.51   Reporting and remitting
   
34.52   Penalties and interest
   
34.53   Failure to collect and report tax; determination of tax by Tax
Administrator
   
34.54   Appeal
   
34.55   Records
   
34.56   Refunds
   
34.57   Actions to collect
   
34.58   Violations; misdemeanor
Cannabis Business Tax
   
34.70   Definitions
   
34.71   Cannabis business tax
PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
§ 34.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance
of the City of Riverbank. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 11901 et seq.
(`67 Code, § 3-8-1)
§ 34.02 TAX IMPOSED; RATE.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which
any lands, tenements, other realty sold within the city shall be granted,
assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or
purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the
consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the
value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds $100, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500 or fractional part
thereof.
   (B)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this section shall be paid by any person
who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or
for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued.
   (C)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall not apply to any
instrument in writing given to secure a debt.
   (D)   The exemptions set forth in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 11921 through
11930 shall apply to any tax imposed pursuant to the subchapter.
(`67 Code, § 3-8-2)
§ 34.03 PARTIES NOT LIABLE.
   Any deed, instrument, or writing to which the United States or any agency or
instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision
thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this
subchapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title.
(Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 11922) (`67 Code, § 3-8-3)
§ 34.04 APPLICATION; CONVEYANCES.
   (A)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the
making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of
reorganization or adjustment:
      (1)   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
      (2)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving
a railroad corporation, as defined in 11 USC 205(m), as amended;
      (3)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving
a corporation, as defined in 11 USC 506(3), as amended; or
      (4)   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is
effected.
   (B)   Divisions (1) to (4), inclusive, of this section shall only apply if
the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs
within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.
(Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 11923) (`67 Code, § 3-8-4) (Ord. 67-9, passed 1-27-67)
§ 34.05 SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall not apply to the making or
delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and
Exchange Commission, as defined in Section 1083(a) of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1954, but only if:
   (A)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to
which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of 15 USC 79(K), relating to the
Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935.
   (B)   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed.
   (C)   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.
(Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 11924) (`67 Code, § 3-8-5) (Ord. 70-1, passed 1-12-70)
§ 34.06 PARTNERSHIP TRANSFERS.
   (A)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be
imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a
partnership or otherwise, if:
      (1)   Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a
continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954; and
      (2)   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
   (B)   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of
Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter,
such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby
there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien
or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the
time of such termination.
   (C)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this subchapter by
reason of a termination described in division (B), and any transfer pursuant
thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of
such termination.
(Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 11925) (`67 Code, § 3-8-6)
§ 34.07 COUNTY RECORDER TO ADMINISTER.
   The County Recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the
provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 11901 et seq. and the provisions of any
county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
(`67 Code, § 3-8-7)
§ 34.08 CLAIMS.
   Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall be
governed by the provisions of Cal Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 5096 et seq.
(`67 Code, § 3-8-8) (Ord. 67-9, passed 11-27-67)
SALES AND USE TAX
§ 34.20 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax
Ordinance.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-1)
§ 34.21 RATE.
   (A)   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a
tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate of 0.995% of the
gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of personal property sold at
retail in the city, commencing for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2006.
   (B)   The tax rate shall decrease each fiscal year at the rate of 0.005%,
effective July 1 of each year.
   (C)   This decrease shall continue until the rate is reduced to 0.950%, at
which time the rate shall remain at that level.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-2) (Am. Ord. 2006-005, passed 3-27-06)
§ 34.22 PURPOSE.
   The City Council hereby declares that this subchapter is adopted to achieve
the following purposes, among other, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
   (A)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 7200 et
seq.;
   (B)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those
provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained
in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 7200 et seq.;
   (C)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and
provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State
Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable
to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and
administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in
administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;
   (D)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a
manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 7200 et seq., minimize the cost of collecting city sales
and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon
persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this subchapter.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-4)
§ 34.23 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   The city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all
functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use
tax ordinance.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-5)
§ 34.24 SALES TAX.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at a rate stated in §
34.21 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible
personal property sold at retail in this city.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-6)
§ 34.25 PLACE OF SALE.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject
to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is
made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state
or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail
sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be
prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-7)
§ 34.26 USE TAX.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer for
storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in §
34.21 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include
delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax
regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-8)
§ 34.27 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW; LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter and except insofar as
they are inconsistent with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 7200 et
seq., all of the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 6001 et seq. are hereby
adopted and made a part of this subchapter as though fully set forth herein.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-9)
   (B)   In adopting the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 6001 et seq.,
wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of
this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not
be made when the word “state” is used as part of the title of the State
Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of
Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of
California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any
agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
subchapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including,
but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries
of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an
exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other
consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt
from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain
subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§
6001 et seq., or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use
or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject
to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; the substitution shall
not be made in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence
thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828; and the substitution shall not be
made for the word “state” in the phrase “Retailer engaged in business in this
state” in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6203.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-10)
§ 34.28 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code § 6067, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this
subchapter.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-11)
§ 34.29 EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exclusions and exemptions. There shall be excluded from the measure of
the tax:
      (1)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer.
      (2)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales
tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code §§ 7200 et seq. by any city and county, county, or city in this
state.
      (3)   The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other
consumption of property purchased by, operators of common carriers and
waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common
carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside this city.
      (4)   The storage or use of tangible personal property in the
transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in
the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the
manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or
foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public
Utilities Commission of the state.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-12) (Ord. 73-10, passed 9-24-73)
   (B)   Exclusions and exemptions.
      (1)   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.
      (2)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax
under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code §§ 7200 et seq. by any city and county, county or city, in this state
shall be exempt from the tax due under this division (B).
      (3)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales
tax, the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to
operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in
which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of
this state, the United States or any foreign government.
      (4)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§
6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such
operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the
United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-13)
   (C)   Exclusions and exemptions.
      (1)   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.
      (2)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax
under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code §§ 7200 et seq. by any city and county, county or city, in this state
shall be exempt from the tax due under this division (C).
      (3)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales
tax, the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to
operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the
city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of
persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.
      (4)   The storage, use of other consumption of tangible personal property
purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such
operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of
such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.
      (5)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales
tax, the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to
operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in
which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of
this state, the United States or any foreign government.
      (6)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§
6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such
operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the
United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-13) (Ord. 83-14, passed 1-23-84)
   (D)   Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.
      (1)   Division (B) of this section shall become operative on January 1 of
the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an
assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio
which is required for local assessments by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 401, at
which time division (A) of this section shall become inoperative.
      (2)   In the event that division (B) of this section becomes operative
and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for
the state-assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required
for local assessments by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 401, division (A) of this
section shall become operative on the first day of the month next following the
month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time division (B) of this
section shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the
month in which the Board again adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed
property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code § 401, at which time division (B) shall again become operative
and division (A) shall become inoperative.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-14)
Editor's note:
   Division (B) of this section shall be operative January 1, 1984. Division
(C) of this section shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the
Legislature of the State of California which amends Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §
7202 or which repeals and reenacts Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7202 to provide an
exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of water-borne vessels in
the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions
(i)(7) and (i)(8) of section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1,
1983.
§ 34.30 AMENDMENTS.
   All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to
the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code
§§ 7200 et seq. shall automatically become a part of this subchapter.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-15)
§ 34.31 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this
city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin
the collection under this subchapter, or Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 7200 et seq.,
of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-16)
§ 34.32 PENALTIES.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
34.20 through
34.31 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for a
period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(`67 Code, § 6-2-17)
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
§ 34.45 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax
Ordinance of the City of Riverbank.
(Ord. 287, passed 12-13-65)
§ 34.46 DEFINITIONS.
   Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this
section govern the construction of this subchapter.
   HOTEL . Any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or
intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel,
studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house,
dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed
location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.
   OCCUPANCY . The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of
any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes.
   OPERATOR . The person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any
other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a
managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing
agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this subchapter and
shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter by either the principal or the managing
agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
   PERSON . Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or
combination acting as a unit.
   RENT . The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy
of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods,
labor or otherwise, including, all receipts, cash, credits and property and
services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR . The City Administrator.
   TRANSIENT . Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy
by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement
for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of
calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall
be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless
there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant
providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is
a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent
to the effective date of this subchapter may be considered.
(Ord. 287, passed 12-13-65)
§ 34.47 TAX IMPOSED.
   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to
and shall pay a tax in the amount of four percent of the rent charged by the
operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which
is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient
shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If
the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be
paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's
ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid
to the operator of the hotel, the Tax Administrator may require that such tax
shall be paid directly to the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 287, passed 12-13-65)
§ 34.48 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No tax shall be imposed upon:
      (1)   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond
the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;
      (2)   Any federal or State of California officer or employee when on
official business;
      (3)   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.
   (B)   No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the
time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by
the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 287, passed 12-13-65)
§ 34.49 OPERATOR'S DUTIES.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this subchapter to the same
extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The
amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged,
and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No
operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or
indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the
operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part
will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 287, passed 12-13-65)
§ 34.50 REGISTRATION.
   Within 30 days after the effective date of this subchapter, or within 30
days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel
renting occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the Tax
Administrator and obtain from him or her a transient occupancy registration
certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
   (A)   The name of the operator;
   (B)   The address of the hotel;
   (C)   The date upon which the certificate was issued;
   (D)   "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the
person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform
Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for
the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and
remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not
authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful
business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly
complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those
requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this
city. This certificate does not constitute a permit."
(Ord. 287, passed 12-13-65)
§ 34.51 REPORTING AND REMITTING.
   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the
close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period
which may be established by the Tax Administrator, make a return to the Tax
Administrator, on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and
received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time
the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to
the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator may establish shorter reporting
periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to
insure collection of the tax and he or she may require further information in
the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business
for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this subchapter
shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is
made to the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 287, passed 12-13-65)
§ 34.52 PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   (A)   Original delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed
by this subchapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10% of the
amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.
   (B)   Continued delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent
remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the
remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of
10% of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the 10%
penalty first imposed.
   (C)   Fraud. If the Tax Administrator determines that the non-payment of any
remittance due under this subchapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25% of the
amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in
divisions (A) and (B) of this section.
   (D)   Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails
to remit any tax imposed by this subchapter shall pay interest at the rate of
0.5% per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of
penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until
paid.
   (E)   Penalties merged with tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as
accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax
herein required to be paid.
(Ord. 287, passed 12-13-65)
§ 34.53 FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX; DETERMINATION OF TAX BY TAX
ADMINISTRATOR.
   If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within
the time provided in this subchapter, any report and remittance of said tax or
any portion thereof required by this subchapter, the Tax Administrator shall
proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and
information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the
Tax Administrator shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able
to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this
subchapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the
same as to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to
determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties
provided for by this subchapter. In case such determination is made, the Tax
Administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it
personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of
address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such
notice make application in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on
the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made
within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined
by the Tax Administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due
and payable. If such application is made, the Tax Administrator shall give not
less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the
operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount
specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At
such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified
tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the Tax
Administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall
thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of
such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The
amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is
taken as provided in
§ 34.54.
(Ord. 287, passed 12-13-65)
§ 34.54 APPEAL.
   Any operator aggrieved by an decision of the Tax Administrator with respect
to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the
Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days of the
serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Council shall fix a
time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in
writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The
findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon
the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing.
Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the
service of notice.
(Ord. 287, passed 12-13-65)
§ 34.55 RECORDS.
   It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment
to the city of any tax imposed by this subchapter to keep and preserve, for a
period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount
of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment
to the city, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to
inspect at all reasonable times.
(Ord. 287, passed 12-13-65)
§ 34.56 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid
or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the city under this subchapter, it may be refunded as provided in
divisions (B) and (C) of this section provided a claim in writing therefor,
stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is
founded, is filed with the Tax Administrator within three years of the date of
payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Tax Administrator.
   (B)   An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously
or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner
prescribed by the Tax Administrator that the person from whom the tax has been
collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a
credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either
been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the
transient to the operator.
   (C)   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than
once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a
claim in the manner provided in division (A) of this section, but only when the
tax was paid by the transient directly to the Tax Administrator, or when the
transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction
of the Tax Administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund
from the operator who collected the tax.
   (D)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless
the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto.
(Ord. 287, passed 12-13-65)
§ 34.57 ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
   Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such
tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be
deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the
city under the provisions of this subchapter shall be liable to an action
brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount.
(Ord. 287, passed 12-13-65)
§ 34.58 VIOLATIONS; MISDEMEANOR.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more
than $500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than
six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as
required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or
refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Tax
Administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty
of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make,
render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent
report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount
due required by this subchapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is
punishable as aforesaid.
(Ord. 287, passed 12-13-65)
CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
§ 34.70 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   BUSINESS. Professions, trades, occupations, gainful activities, and all and
every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit.
   CANNABIS or MARIJUANA. Has the meaning as defined in Cal. Health & Safety
Code § 11018.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS. Any business activity involving the commercial
cultivation, distribution, and exchange of cannabis, including, but not limited
to, the planting, cultivation, harvesting, transporting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, processing, preparing, storing, packaging, providing,
wholesale and retail sales, whether fixed, mobile, permanent, or temporary,
where cannabis is made available, sold, given, distributed, or otherwise
provided in accordance with the existing laws of the State of California,
whether for medical or non-medical reasons.
   CITY. The City of Riverbank, a municipal corporation of the State of
California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized,
consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.
   COLLECTOR. The Director of Finance or other city officer or employee charged
with the administration of this chapter.
   FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS. The premises occupied in the city for the
particular purpose of conducting a business there and regularly kept open for
that purpose with a competent person in attendance for the purpose of attending
to such business.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The total amount charged or received for the performance of
any act, service, or employment of whatever nature it may be, whether or not
such service, act, or employment is done as a part of or in connection with the
sale of goods, wares, merchandise, for which a charge is made or credit
allowed. Gross receipts shall be calculated without any deduction on account of
any of the following:
      (1)   The cost of tangible property sold or bartered;
      (2)   The cost of materials or products used, labor or service cost,
interest paid, losses, or other expense; or
      (3)   Transportation costs.
   PERSON. All domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates,
joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business or common
law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business
in the city.
   REPORTING PERIOD. A year, quarter, or calendar month, as determined by the
Collector.
(Ord. 2018-008, passed 12-11-18)
§ 34.71 CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX.
   (A)   Every person engaged in a cannabis business shall pay an annual
business license tax of up to $.10 for each $1 of gross receipts, regardless
whether the city has authorized the cannabis business.
   (B)   The tax rate shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The City
Council may, in its discretion, implement such cannabis business tax rate it
deems appropriate, and may by resolution increase or lower such tax rate from
time to time, provided that the cannabis business tax shall not exceed $.10 for
each $1 of gross receipts.
   (C)   Any tax adopted by the City Council pursuant to this chapter shall
apply only to those cannabis businesses operating outside the scope of a
development agreement approved by the City Council. However, the tax may apply
to all cannabis businesses in the event the City Council cancels the Cannabis
Pilot Program.
   (D)   The Collector shall establish reporting periods for the periodic
collection of gross receipts. The reporting period may fall under yearly,
quarterly, or monthly reporting, or any reasonable reporting period established
by the Collector.
   (E)   Failure to pay the cannabis business tax shall be subject to
penalties, interest charges, and assessments as the City Council may establish
by resolution, and the city may use any and all code enforcement remedies
available at law to collect such payments.
   (F)   The payment of the cannabis business tax shall not be construed as
authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal
business in an illegal manner. Nothing in this section shall be applied or
construed as authorizing the sale of cannabis.
   (G)   The Collector or his or her designee shall annually audit any cannabis
business taxes imposed by this section to verify that tax revenues have been
properly expended in accordance with the law.
   (H)   The cannabis business tax is not a sales tax and shall not be assessed
as such.
   (I)   This section was submitted to the qualified voters of the city for
approval. Any amendment to the maximum tax rate therefore may not become
effective until such amendment is approved by the voters. The voters expressly
authorize the City Council to amend, modify, change or revise any other
provisions of this section as the City Council deems in the best interest of
the city. The City Council or City Manager may promulgate rules, regulations
and procedures to implement this section and to ensure the efficient and timely
collection of any taxes or any related penalties imposed by this section.
(Ord. 2018-008, passed 12-11-18)
CHAPTER 35: PERSONNEL
Section
   
35.01   Merit system; application and exceptions
   
35.02   Classification plan
   
35.03   Ineligibility for employment
   
35.04   Retirement contract
§ 35.01 MERIT SYSTEM; APPLICATION AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The City Manager shall formulate and recommend to the Council for its
approval rules and regulations and amendments thereto pertaining to the
operation of a merit personnel program. Such rules and regulations shall cover
the selection, appointment, classification, promotion, demotion, suspension,
retirement and termination of municipal service employees and all other matters
governing the status of employees and conditions of their employment. Approval
of such rules, regulations and amendments thereto shall be by resolution of the
Council.
(`67 Code, § 1-9-1)
   (B)   The provisions of the merit system established by this section and
accompanying rules and regulations shall apply to all positions and employments
in the municipal service except:
      (1)   Elective officers;
      (2)   The City Attorney;
      (3)   Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees; and
      (4)   Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional or
technical services.
(`67 Code, § 1-9-2)
§ 35.02 CLASSIFICATION PLAN.
   All positions of the municipal service shall be classified within a position
classification plan, which shall be maintained and operated by the City
Manager.
(`67 Code, § 1-9-4) (Ord. 72-4, passed 4-10-72)
§ 35.03 INELIGIBILITY FOR EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, no person convicted of a
felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude shall be eligible for
employment in the accepted or competitive service of the city, provided,
however, that the appointing authority may disregard such conviction if he
finds and determines that mitigating circumstances exist, such as but not
limited to evidence of rehabilitation, length of time elapsed since such
conviction, the age of such person at the time of a conviction, or the fact
that the classification applied for is unrelated to such conviction.
   (B)   The City Manager and the Sheriff's Commanding Officer of the city are
hereby authorized to have access to the “State Summary Criminal History
Information” as provided for in Cal. Penal Code § 11105.
(`67 Code, § 1-9-5) (Ord. 77-5, passed 5-23-77)
§ 35.04 RETIREMENT CONTRACT.
   An amendment to the contract between the City Council and the Board of
Administration, California Public Employees' Retirement System is hereby
authorized, a copy of the amendment being attached to Ordinance 2011-002 and by
such reference made a part hereof as though herein set out in full.
(Ord. 97-06, passed 4-28-97; Am. Ord. 2001-02, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord. 2011-
002, passed 2-28-11)
CHAPTER 36: CITY POLICIES
Section
   
36.01   Public notices
   
36.02   Official seal or logo use restricted
   
36.03   Disposition of unclaimed and surplus property
   
36.04   Claims against the city for money or damages
   
36.05   Judicial review
§ 36.01 PUBLIC NOTICES.
   For the purpose of posting notices when required by law the three most
public places in the city shall be and are located as follows:
   (A)   The United States Post Office on Santa Fe Street between Second and
Third Streets.
   (B)   On the front of City Hall on Santa Fe Street at Third Street.
   (C)   The Library on Santa Fe Street.
(`67 Code, § 1-11-1) (Ord. 2, passed 8-1-22)
   (D)   The front of the Community Center on Santa Fe Street.
(Ord. 2008-014, passed 10-13-08)
§ 36.02 OFFICIAL SEAL OR LOGO USE RESTRICTED.
   (A)   Use prohibited. It is hereby unlawful for any person, corporation, or
entity to use the Official Seal of the city or the official logo of the city,
as reflected hereinbelow, for political campaign purposes without the express
prior written consent of the City Council.
(Am. Ord. 2008-014, passed 10-13-08)
   (B)   Exception. It is not the intent of this chapter to prohibit nor is
there a prohibition established by any provision of this chapter against the
City Council from using the official seal of the city or the official logo of
the city when acting in its official capacity in furtherance of official or
authorized city business in furtherance of city goals, policies, programs or
political support for or against issues, measures, initiatives or referendum of
local, statewide or national concern.
(`67 Code, § 1-14-1)
   (C)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply:
   POLITICAL CAMPAIGN PURPOSE. Influencing or attempting to influence the
action of the electorate for or against:
      (1)   Any nomination or election of a candidate, as candidate is defined
by Cal. Gov't Code § 82007;
      (2)   The qualification or passage of any local, state, or national
measure, initiative or referendum which use is made by candidate or supporter.
(`67 Code, § 1-14-2)
   (D)   Exception; Council consent; finding required. Before the City Council
may grant consent, pursuant to this chapter, the Council shall make a finding
that such use is not for official city purposes in that it is ruled to a
candidacy or the qualification of, or passage of, a local, state, or national
measure, initiative or referendum.
(`67 Code, § 1-14-3) (Ord. 91-16, passed 1-13-92)
§ 36.03 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED AND SURPLUS PROPERTY.
   (A)   Civil code provisions apply. The city elects to be governed by the
provisions of Cal. Civ. Code § 2080-2080.9 with respect to unclaimed property.
(`67 Code, § 7-13-1)
   (B)   Unclaimed property.
      (1)   Any unclaimed property shall be held by the Riverbank Police
Services Division for a period of at least four months, except bicycles which
may be held for three months.
      (2)   Thereafter such property will be sold at public auction to the
highest bidder.
      (3)   Notice of such sale shall be given by the Sheriff's Commanding
Officer at least five days before the time fixed for the public auction by
publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county
in which the property is found.
      (4)   Any property remaining unsold after being offered at such public
auction may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the city.
      (5)   If the city determines that any such property is needed for a
public use, such property may be retained by the city and need not be sold. Any
unclaimed bicycles or toys which are unclaimed for a period of at least three
months may be turned over to the Probation Officer or to the Welfare Department
of Stanislaus County for use in any program of activities designed to prevent
juvenile delinquency.
(`67 Code, § 7-13-2) (Ord. 76-3, passed 2-9-76)
   (C)   Disposition of surplus property.
      (1)   No vehicles, equipment, materials and other items that become
surplus to the city and owned by the city shall be disposed of except after
approval by the City Council and in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this section.
      (2)   The following procedure(s) shall be used for the disposal of city
property:
         (a)   1.   Each department director shall submit to the Finance
Director, at such times and in such forms as the Director prescribes, reports
showing all commodities and equipment that are no longer used or that have
become obsolete or worn out.
            2.   The Finance Director has the authority to sell or otherwise
dispose of all commodities and equipment that cannot be used by any department,
or that have become unsuitable for city use, or to exchange the same for, or
trade the same in on, new commodities and equipment.
         (b)   The Finance Director shall prepare a combined inventory of all
surplus items, and forward a copy to the City Manager.
         (c)   The City Manager shall make a copy of the inventory, prepare a
report, and place the item on the City Council agenda, requesting approval to
dispose the inventory items.
         (d)   Upon approval by Council, disposition may include abandonment,
destruction or donation to public bodies, charitable, civil or nonprofit
organizations in the city.
            1.   Sales procedures may include negotiated sales, acceptance of
sealed bids or public auction.
            2.   Services of a paid auctioneer may be used, as appropriate.
         (e)   Annually, the City Clerk will send a letter to all nonprofit
agencies in the city, and publish in the local newspaper the procedures for
disbursing surplus items to nonprofit agencies.
            1.   The City Clerk shall keep a list of the nonprofit agencies
interested in receiving surplus items.
            2.   Once City Council approves any item(s) surplus, the City Clerk
will forward a letter to all interested nonprofit agencies listing the surplus
item(s).
            3.   Items will be disposed on a first-come, first-served basis.
         (f)   All monies received from the sale of surplus items shall be
promptly deposited in the fund accounts of the city according to the city code.
      (3)   No city employee, nor a member of the immediate family of a city
employee, may purchase any item from the city at auction or by sealed bid.
         (a)   As used herein, CITY EMPLOYEE shall mean and be construed as any
person employed by the city and elected officials of the city.
         (b)   As used herein, IMMEDIATE FAMILY OF EMPLOYEE shall mean and be
construed as the spouse, children and parents of any employee.
      (4)   No person acting on behalf of a city employee shall purchase any
unclaimed or surplus property from the city at auction or by sealed bid.
(`67 Code, § 7-13-3) (Am. Ord. 78-16, passed 10-9-78; Am. Ord. 2006-013, passed
11-27-06)
§ 36.04 CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY FOR MONEY OR DAMAGES.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority contained in Cal. Gov't Code § 935, the
following claims procedures are established for those claims against the city
for money or damages not now governed by state or local laws.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 905, all
claims against the city for damages or money, when a procedure for processing
such claims is not otherwise provided by state or local laws, shall be
presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Cal.
Gov’t Code §§ 910 through 915.2. Such claims shall further be subject to the
provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 945 through 946, relating to the prohibition
of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the
Council.
(Ord. 97-01, passed 1-27-97; Am. Ord. 2009-007, passed 9-14-09)
§ 36.05 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   (A)   The City Council hereby finds and determines that in order to provide
uniform procedures for review of administrative decisions of the city, it is
desirable that the city make Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 1094.6 applicable to the
city.
(`67 Code, § 1-12-1)
   (B)   The provisions of Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 1094.6 are applicable to the
city.
(`67 Code, § 1-12-2) (Ord. 82-5, passed 6-28-82)
CHAPTER 37: EMERGENCY SERVICES, ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS
Section
   
37.01   Purposes
   
37.02   Definition
   
37.03   Disaster Council membership
   
37.04   Disaster Council powers and duties
   
37.05   Operational Area Council
   
37.06   Meetings
   
37.07   State of war, state of emergency or local emergency
   
37.08   Plan and agreement preparation
   
37.09   Emergency organization
   
37.10   Punishment of violations
   
37.11   Expenditures
   
37.12   Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services; Office created
   
37.13   Powers and duties of Director and Assistant Director of Emergency
Services
§ 37.01 PURPOSES.
   The declared purposes of this chapter is to comply with the California
Emergency Services Act Gov’t Code §§ 8550 et seq. by providing for the
preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and
property within the city in the event of an emergency, and the direction of the
emergency organization and the coordination of the emergency functions of the
city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected
private persons. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by
Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 8610 and 6500.
(Ord. 2015-013, passed 8-11-15)
§ 37.02 DEFINITION.
   As used in this chapter, EMERGENCY shall mean the actual or threatened
existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of
persons and property with the city caused by such conditions as air pollution,
fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake, domestic terrorism or other
conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war,
but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions
are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel,
equipment and facilities of the city, requiring the combined forces of other
political subdivisions to combat.
(Ord. 2015-013, passed 8-11-15)
§ 37.03 DISASTER COUNCIL MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   A combined City/County Disaster Council is hereby created.
   (B)   Annually, the Riverbank City Council will appoint an elected official
to serve on the City/County Disaster Council.
   (C)   The City/County Disaster Council shall also consist of the following:
      (1)   The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be Chair of the
Disaster Council;
      (2)   A member of the Board of Supervisors, who shall be Vice-
Chairperson;
      (3)   The Assistant Director of Stanislaus County Emergency Services, who
shall be Secretary; and
      (4)   One elected official from each city in Stanislaus County. The city
may select an alternate to attend meetings and to act on its behalf in the
event the elected official is unavailable. The alternate need not be an elected
official, so long as the alternate has been appointed by the City Council.
(Ord. 2015-013, passed 8-11-15)
§ 37.04 DISASTER COUNCIL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Disaster Council shall have power to:
      (1)   Oversee the preparedness activities of the various county
departments and other jurisdictions in the Stanislaus County Operational Area.
This includes preparation of emergency and disaster plans, policies and
procedures and ensuring unity of purpose. The Council will be responsible to
ensure unity of purpose. The Council will be responsible to ensure compliance
with the National Incident Management System, the Standardized Emergency
Management System and the Incident Command System;
      (2)   Approve to form all proposed emergency operations procedures, plans
and other documents related to emergency preparedness and planning;
      (3)   Hear proposals from any agency, department or interested party in
emergency and disaster preparedness. Prior to any formal action, the proposal
shall have the approval of the Operational Area Council for operational and
procedural conformity with the Stanislaus County emergency operations plan,
policies and procedures;
      (4)   Be required to have a majority of the members present for approval
and/or review of any plan, policies or issues and a simple majority vote will
carry the recommended action. Thereafter, the recommended action will be
forwarded to the appropriate board, commission or executive representative; and
      (5)   Sit as the Disaster Council for any jurisdiction that deems it
appropriate by resolution and local ordinance.
      (6)   Administer a disaster service worker volunteer program, pursuant to
Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 19, §§ 2570 et seq.
   (B)   The Disaster Council does not have operational duties or powers during
emergencies, disasters or other events or incidents.
(Ord. 2015-013, passed 8-11-15)
§ 37.05 OPERATIONAL AREA COUNCIL.
   (A)   The Stanislaus County Operational Area Council is created under the
authority of Cal. Gov't Code Article 9, § 8605, and shall consist of the
Assistant Director of Emergency Services and Joint Powers Agreement (JPA)
members that represent each city within Stanislaus County.
   (B)   Generally, the JPA member will be the emergency manager from his or
her jurisdiction.
   (C)   The Operational Area Council will:
      (1)   Coordinate, review and recommend for approval all emergency or
disaster response policies, procedures, plans and other influencing factors or
events that would affect the Stanislaus Operational Area;
      (2)   Review all disaster plans by any agency or jurisdiction in
Stanislaus County for approval to form and compliance with the National
Incident Management System, the Standardized Emergency Management System and
the Incident Command System. After review of the proposed plans, policies and
procedures relating to emergency management, the Operational Area Council will
then make its recommendation to the Disaster Council;
      (3)   Be the lead agency for the multi-agency Emergency Operations Center
Management Team and the multi-agency incident management team(s);
      (4)   Foster an effective flow of disaster information and emergency
preparedness on a day-to-day basis through training, exercises, uniformity in
planning and response plans and policies; and
      (5)   Appoint task forces and/or specialist groups for specific detailed
work that requires the focus of technical experts to develop plans, policies
and procedures for the Stanislaus Operation Area.
   (D)   The Operational Area Council does not have operational duties or
powers during an event or emergency and is created to serve in the preparedness
and planning phases only.
(Ord. 2015-013, passed 8-11-15)
§ 37.06 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Disaster Council shall meet at least annually and as often as may
be deemed necessary. The Disaster Council will operate under the Brown Act for
open meetings and local legislative bodies.
   (B)   The Operational Area Council shall meet quarterly or upon call of the
Assistant Director of Emergency Services.
(Ord. 2015-013, passed 8-11-15)
§ 37.07 STATE OF WAR, STATE OF EMERGENCY OR LOCAL EMERGENCY.
   During a "state of war", "state of emergency" or "local emergency", the
Chair of the Disaster Council or the Director of Emergency Services may call
upon the Disaster Council to meet with the emergency operations center policy
group to act as an advisory group on issues as determined by the Director of
Emergency Services or the Disaster Council Chair.
(Ord. 2015-013, passed 8-11-15)
§ 37.08 PLAN AND AGREEMENT PREPARATION.
   It shall be the duty of the Stanislaus County Disaster Council to review and
recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency plans, agreements and
such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to
implement such plans and agreements.
(Ord. 2015-013, passed 8-11-15)
§ 37.09 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION.
   All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer
forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations
and persons who may, by agreement or operation of law, including persons
impressed into service under the provisions of §
37.13(A)(6), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and
property in this county during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency
organization of the city.
(Ord. 2015-013, passed 8-11-15)
§ 37.10 PUNISHMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in the §
10.99, for any person, during an emergency, to:
   (A)   Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency
organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or
her by virtue of this chapter;
   (B)   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant
to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to
give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants
of the city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense of protection thereof;
and
   (C)   Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification
specified by the emergency agency of the state.
(Ord. 2015-013, passed 8-11-15)
§ 37.11 EXPENDITURES.
   Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including
mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct
protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city and county.
(Ord. 2015-013, passed 8-11-15)
§ 37.12 DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES; OFFICE CREATED.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Office of Director of Emergency Services,
and the City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services.
   (B)   There is hereby created the Office of Assistant Director of Emergency
Services who shall be assigned by the City Manager and designated as the city's
Emergency Manager.
(Ord. 2015-013, passed 8-11-15)
§ 37.13 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY
SERVICES.
   (A)   The Director is hereby identified empowered to:
      (1)   Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened
existence of a "local emergency" if the City Council is in session, or to issue
such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local
emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to
ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter, or the proclamation shall
have no further force or effect;
      (2)   Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in
the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to
cope with the emergency;
      (3)   Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of the
city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;
      (4)   Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff
of the emergency organization of the city; and resolve questions of authority
and responsibility that may arise between them;
      (5)   Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies
on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein; and
      (6)   In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein
provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the
Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a
"state of war emergency", the Director is hereby empowered:
         (a)   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency;
provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest
practicable time by the City Council;
         (b)   To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties
found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind
the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer
the same for public use;
         (c)   To require emergency services of any city officer or employee
and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county
or the existence of a "state of war emergency", to command the aid of as many
citizens of the community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his
or her duties; and such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits
and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service
workers;
         (d)   To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city
department or agency; and
         (e)   To execute all of his or her ordinary power as City Manager, all
of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter, by resolution
or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, all powers
conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City
Council and by any other lawful authority.
   (B)   The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of
succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is
unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during
an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council.
   (C)   The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the Director
and with the assistance of Emergency Service Chiefs, develop emergency plans
and manage the emergency programs of the city; and shall have such other powers
and duties as may be assigned by the Director.
(Ord. 2015-013, passed 8-11-15)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
50.   GARBAGE
         
51.   SEWERS
         
52.   WATER
         
53.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Requirement to use solid waste collection service; noncompliance
   
50.03   Trash accumulations prohibited
   
50.04   Open burning prohibited
   
50.05   Burning, burying or dumping garbage
   
50.06   Solid collection service; residential
   
50.07   Refuse collection service; commercial
   
50.08   Waivers for generators
   
50.09   Requirements for commercial edible food generators
   
50.10   Requirements for food recovery organizations and services and regional
agencies
   
50.11   Requirements for haulers and facility operators
   
50.12   Self-hauler requirements
   
50.13   Anti-scavenging
   
50.14   City may designate location of disposal; franchised collector to
furnish containers
   
50.15   Rates to be charged
   
50.16   Deposits
   
50.17   Method of collection of rates by city
   
50.18   Owners’ liability for payment of services to multiple dwellings
   
50.19   Inspections and investigations by city
   
50.20   Enforcement
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLACK CONTAINER. Any bin, can, receptacle, or any other type of receptacle
or depository designated by the city or a city-designated waste removal company
for the deposit, storage, and collection of solid waste not designated or
collection in the green container. A container may also be described as an
automatic lift container cart, drop box, roll-off, compactor container,
standard automated container, drop box container or detachable container or
bin.
   CALRECYCLE. California's Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery,
which is the department designated with responsibility for developing,
implementing, and enforcing SB 1383 regulations on jurisdictions (and others).
   CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS or CCR. The State of California Code of
Regulations. CCR references in this chapter are preceded with a number that
refers to the relevant title of the CCR (e.g., "14 CCR" refers to Title 14 of
CCR).
   CITY. The City of Riverbank, California, or the area within the territorial
limits of the City of Riverbank, California, and such territory outside of the
city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any
constitutional or statutory provision.
   CITY ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The City Manager, or his or her designee. The
City Manager, or his or her designee, shall administer, implement and enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
   CITY MANAGER. City Manager of the City of Riverbank, or his or her designee,
which may include city employees.
   COLLECTION. To take physical possession of solid waste at, and remove from,
the place of generation for transport to a solid waste facility or other
recovery activity.
   COLLECTOR. A refuse collector who has entered into a contract with the city,
or who has received a franchise from the city, to collect solid waste within
the city.
   COMMERCIAL BUSINESS or COMMERCIAL. A firm, partnership, proprietorship,
joint-stock company, corporation, or association, whether for-profit or
nonprofit, strip mall, industrial facility, or a multi-family residential
dwelling, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(6). A multi-family
residential dwelling that consists of fewer than five units is not a COMMERCIAL
BUSINESS for purposes of implementing this chapter.
   COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A tier one or a tier two commercial edible
food generator as defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(73) and (a)(74). For the
purposes of this definition, food recovery organizations and food recovery
services are not COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATORS pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982
(a)(7).
   COMPLIANCE REVIEW. A review of records by the City of Riverbank to determine
compliance with this chapter.
   COMMUNITY COMPOSTING. Any activity that composts green material,
agricultural material, food material, and vegetative food material, alone or in
combination and the total amount of feedstock and compost on-site at any one
time does not exceed 100 cubic yards and 750 square feet, as specified in 14
CCR § 17855(a)(4); or as otherwise defined by 14 CCR § 18982(a)(8).
   COMPOST. Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 17896.2(a)(4), which stated, as
of the effective date of this chapter, that COMPOST means the product resulting
from the controlled biological decomposition of organic solid wastes that are
source separated from the municipal solid waste stream, or which are separated
at a centralized facility.
   COMPOSTABLE PLASTICS or COMPOSTABLE PLASTIC. Plastic materials that meet the
ASTM D6400 standard for composability, or as otherwise described in 14 CCR §
18984.2(a)(1)(C).
   CONTAINER CONTAMINATION or CONTAMINATED CONTAINER. A container, regardless
of color, that contains prohibited container contaminants, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(55).
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS or C&D. Used or discarded materials
resulting from construction, renovation, remodeling, repair, demolition,
excavation or construction clean-up operations on any pavement or structure.
   CONTAINER or COLLECTION CONTAINER. Any bin, box or cart used for the purpose
of holding solid waste for collection.
   CONTAINERIZED SERVICE. Service approved by the City Manager, wherein the
city or the collector provides a vehicle equipped for mechanical handling of
one or two cubic yard containers with casters; such containers shall be
furnished by the customer and shall be of a type approved by the City Manager,
or rented from the city or the collector.
   DESIGNATED SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC WASTE FACILITY. As defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(14.5), which means a solid waste facility that accepts a source
separated organic waste collection stream as defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)(26.6)
and complies with one of the following:
      (1)   (a)   The facility is a "transfer/processor", as defined in 14 CCR
§ 18815.2(a)(62), that is in compliance with the reporting requirements of 14
CCR § 18815.5(d), and meets or exceeds an annual average source separated
organic content recovery rate of 50% between January 1, 2022 and December 31,
2024 and 75% on and after January 1, 2025 as calculated pursuant to 14 CCR §
18815.5(f) for organic waste received from the source separated organic waste
collection stream.
         (b)   If a transfer/processor has an annual average source separated
organic content recovery rate lower than the rate required in division (1)(a)
for two consecutive reporting periods, or three reporting periods within three
years, the facility shall not qualify as a DESIGNATED SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC
WASTE FACILITY.
      (2)   (a)   The facility is a "composting operation" or "composting
facility", as defined in 14 CCR § 18815.2(a)(13), that pursuant to the reports
submitted under 14 CCR § 18815.7 demonstrates that the percent of the material
removed for landfill disposal that is organic waste is less than the percent
specified in 14 CCR §§ 17409.5.8(c)(2) or 17409.5.8(c)(3), whichever is
applicable, and, if applicable, complies with the digestate handling
requirements specified in 14 CCR § 17896.5.
         (b)   If the percent of the material removed for landfill disposal
that is organic waste is more than the percent specified in 14 CCR §§ 17409.5.8
(c)(2) or 17409.5.8(c)(3), for two consecutive reporting periods, or three
reporting periods within three years, the facility shall not qualify as a
DESIGNATED SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC WASTE FACILITY. For the purposes of this
chapter, the reporting periods shall be consistent with those defined in 14 CCR
§ 18815.2(a)(49).
   DESIGNEE. An entity that the city contracts with or otherwise arranges to
carry out any of the city's responsibilities of this chapter as authorized in
14 CCR § 18981.2. A DESIGNEE may be a government entity, a hauler, a private
entity, or a combination of those entities.
   EDIBLE FOOD. Food intended for human consumption, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(18). For the purposes of this chapter or as otherwise defined
in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(18), EDIBLE FOOD is not solid waste if it is recovered and
not discarded. Nothing in this chapter or in 14 CCR Division 7, Chapter 12
requires or authorizes the recovery of EDIBLE FOOD that does not meet the food
safety requirements of the Cal. Retail Food Code.
   ENFORCEMENT ACTION. An action of the city to address noncompliance with this
chapter, including, but not limited to, issuing administrative citations,
fines, penalties, or using other remedies.
   EXCLUDED WASTE. Hazardous substance, hazardous waste, infectious waste,
designated waste, volatile, corrosive, medical waste, infectious, regulated
radioactive waste, and toxic substances or material that facility operator(s),
which receive materials from the city and its generators, reasonably believe(s)
would, as a result of or upon acceptance, transfer, processing, or disposal, be
a violation of local, state, or federal law, regulation, or ordinance,
including: land use restrictions or conditions, waste that cannot be disposed
of in Class III landfills or accepted at the facility by permit conditions,
waste that in the city's or its designee's reasonable opinion would present a
significant risk to human health or the environment, cause a nuisance or
otherwise create or expose the city or its designee to potential liability; but
not including de minimis volumes or concentrations of waste of a type and
amount normally found in single-family or multi-family solid waste after
implementation of programs for the safe collection, processing, recycling,
treatment, and disposal of batteries and paint in compliance with Cal. Pub.
Res. Code §§ 41500 and 41802. EXCLUDED WASTE does not include used motor oil
and filters, household batteries, universal wastes, and/or latex paint when
such materials are defined as allowable materials for collection through the
city's collection programs and the generator or customer has properly placed
the materials for collection pursuant to instructions provided by the city or
its designee for collection services.
   FOOD. Has the same meaning as in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113781.
   FOOD DISTRIBUTOR. A company that distributes food to entities including, but
not limited to, supermarkets and grocery stores, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(22).
   FOOD FACILITY. The same meaning as in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113789.
   FOOD RECOVERY. Actions to collect and distribute food for human consumption
that otherwise would be disposed, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(24).
   FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   An entity that engages in the collection or receipt of edible food
from commercial edible food generators and distributes that edible food to the
public for food recovery either directly or through other entities or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(25), including, but not limited to:
         (a)   A food bank as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113783;
         (b)   A nonprofit charitable organization as defined in Cal. Health
and Safety Code § 113841; and
         (c)   A nonprofit charitable temporary food facility as defined in
Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113842.
      (2)   A FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION is not a commercial edible food
generator for the purposes of this chapter and implementation of 14 CCR
Division 7, Chapter 12 pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
      (3)   If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(25) for FOOD RECOVERY
ORGANIZATION differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(25) shall apply to this chapter.
   FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE. A person or entity that collects and transports
edible food from a commercial edible food generator to a food recovery
organization or other entities for food recovery, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(26). A FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE is not a commercial edible food
generator for the purposes of this chapter and implementation of 14 CCR
Division 7, Chapter 12 pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
   FOOD SCRAPS. All food such as, but not limited to, fruits, vegetables, meat,
poultry, seafood, shellfish, bones, rice, beans, pasta, bread, cheese, and
eggshells. FOOD SCRAPS excludes fats, oils, and grease when such materials are
source separated from other FOOD SCRAPS. FOOD SCRAPS does not include excluded
waste.
   FOOD SERVICE PROVIDER. An entity primarily engaged in providing food
services to institutional, governmental, commercial, or industrial locations of
others based on contractual arrangements with these types of organizations, or
as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(27).
   FOOD-SOILED PAPER. Compostable paper material that has come in contact with
food or liquid, such as, but not limited to, compostable paper plates, paper
coffee cups, napkins, pizza boxes, and milk cartons.
   FOOD WASTE. Food scraps, food-soiled paper, and compostable plastics.
   GREEN CONTAINER. Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a)(29) and
shall be used for the purpose of storage and collection of source separated
organic waste.
   GROCERY STORE. A store primarily engaged in the retail sale of canned food;
dry goods; fresh fruits and vegetables; fresh meats, fish, and poultry; and any
area that is not separately owned within the store where the food is prepared
and served, including a bakery, deli, and meat and seafood departments, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(30).
   HAULER. A person who collects material from a generator and delivers it to a
reporting entity, end user, or a destination outside of the state. HAULER
includes "contractor". A person who transports material from reporting entity
to another person is a transporter, not a HAULER.
   HAULER ROUTE. The designated itinerary or sequence of stops for each segment
of the city's collection service area, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(31.5).
   HIGH DIVERSION ORGANIC WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY. A facility that is in
compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR § 18815.5(d) and meets or
exceeds an annual average mixed waste organic content recovery rate of 50%
between January 1, 2022 and December 31, 2024, and 75% after January 1, 2025,
as calculated pursuant to 14 CCR § 18815.5(e) for organic waste received from
the "mixed waste organic collection stream" as defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)
(11.5); or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(33).
   INSPECTION. A site visit where the city reviews records, containers, and an
entity's collection, handling, recycling, or landfill disposal of organic waste
or edible food handling to determine if the entity is complying with
requirements set forth in this chapter, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(35).
   LARGE EVENT. An event, including, but not limited to, a sporting event or a
flea market, that charges an admission price, or is operated by a local agency,
and serves an average of more than 2,000 individuals per day of operation of
the event, at a location that includes, but is not limited to, a public,
nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street system, or
other open space when being used for an event. If the definition in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(38) differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(38) shall apply to this chapter.
   LARGE VENUE. A permanent venue facility that annually seats or serves an
average of more than 2,000 individuals within the grounds of the facility per
day of operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this chapter and
implementation of 14 CCR Division 7, Chapter 12, a venue facility includes, but
is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned or operated stadium,
amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park, conference or civic center, zoo,
aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse track, performing arts center, fairground,
museum, theater, or other public attraction facility. For purposes of this
chapter and implementation of 14 CCR Division 7, Chapter 12, a site under
common ownership or control that includes more than one LARGE VENUE that is
contiguous with other LARGE VENUES in the site, is a single LARGE VENUE. If the
definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(39) differs from this definition, the
definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(39) shall apply to this chapter.
   LOCAL EDUCATION AGENCY. A school district, charter school, or county office
of education that is not subject to the control of city or county regulations
related to solid waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(40).
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING or MULTI-FAMILY. Of, from, or pertaining
to residential premises with five or more dwelling units. MULTI-FAMILY premises
do not include hotels, motels, or other transient occupancy facilities, which
are considered commercial businesses.    
   MWELO. The Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (MWELO), 23 CCR
Division 2, Chapter 2.7.
   NON-COMPOSTABLE PAPER. Includes, but is not limited to, paper that is coated
in a plastic and/or metallic material that will not break down in the
composting process, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(41).
   NON-LOCAL ENTITY. Entities that are not subject to the city's enforcement
authority, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(42), including:
      (1)   Special district(s) located within the boundaries of the city,
including Riverbank Unified School District, state agencies located within the
boundaries of the city, including Caltrans, Cal Fire or Stanislaus County
facilities.
   NON-ORGANIC RECYCLABLES. Non-putrescible and non-hazardous recyclable
wastes, including, but not limited to, bottles, cans, metals, plastics and
glass, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(43).
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NOV). A notice that a violation has occurred that
includes a compliance date to avoid an action to seek penalties, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(45) or further explained in 14 CCR §
18995.4.
   ORGANIC WASTE. Solid wastes containing material originated from living
organisms and their metabolic waste products, including, but not limited to,
food, green material, landscape and pruning waste, organic textiles and
carpets, lumber, wood, paper products, printing and writing paper, manure,
biosolids, digestate, and sludges or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(46). Biosolids and digestate are as defined by 14 CCR § 18982(a).
   ORGANIC WASTE GENERATOR. A person or entity that is responsible for the
initial creation of organic waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(48).
   PAPER PRODUCTS. Include, but are not limited to, paper janitorial supplies,
cartons, wrapping, packaging, file folders, hanging files, corrugated boxes,
tissue, and toweling, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(51).
   PERSON. Any person or persons, firm, association, corporation or other
entity acting as principal, agent or officer, servant or employee, for
themselves or for any other person, firm or corporation.
   PREMISES. Includes a tract or parcel of land with or without habitable
buildings or appurtenant structures. For purposes of this chapter, PREMISES
includes residential and commercial uses of the land, whether owned, leased,
rented or subrented, including every dwelling house, dwelling unit, apartment
house or multiple-dwelling building, trailer or mobile home park, store,
restaurant, rooming house, hotel, motel, office building, department store,
manufacturing, processing or assembling shop or plant, warehouse and every
other place or premises where any person resides, or any business is carried on
or conducted within the city.
   PRINTING AND WRITING PAPERS. Include, but are not limited to, copy,
xerographic, watermark, cotton fiber, offset, forms, computer printout paper,
white wove envelopes, manila envelopes, book paper, note pads, writing tablets,
newsprint, and other uncoated writing papers, posters, index cards, calendars,
brochures, reports, magazines, and publications, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(54).
   PROHIBITED CONTAINER CONTAMINANTS.
      (1)   Discarded materials placed in the green container that are not
identified as acceptable source separated green container organic waste for the
city's green container;
      (2)   Discarded materials placed in the black container that are
acceptable source separated green container organic waste for the city's green
container;
      (3)   Excluded waste placed in any container.
   RECOVERED ORGANIC WASTE PRODUCTS. Products made from California, landfill-
diverted recovered organic waste processed in a permitted or otherwise
authorized facility, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(60).
   RECOVERY. Any activity or process described in 14 CCR § 18983.1(b), or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(49).
   RECYCLED-CONTENT PAPER. Paper products and printing and writing paper that
consists of at least 30%, by fiber weight, postconsumer fiber, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(61).
   REGIONAL AGENCY. Regional agency as defined in Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 40181.
   REMOTE MONITORING. The use of the internet of things and/or wireless
electronic devices to visualize the contents of containers, for purposes of
identifying the quantity of materials in containers (level of fill) and/or
presence of prohibited container.
   RESIDENTIAL. For the purposes of this chapter, any premises consisting of
between one and four dwelling units, and on-site domestic uses accessory to
these dwelling units. A multi-family dwelling that consists of fewer than five
dwelling units is RESIDENTIAL, for the purposes of this chapter.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of food
and drinks for on-premises or immediate consumption, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(64).
   ROUTE REVIEW. A visual inspection of containers along a hauler route for the
purpose of determining container contamination and may include mechanical
inspection methods such as the use of cameras, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(65).
   SB 1383. Senate Bill 1383 of 2016 approved by the Governor on September 19,
2016, which added Sections 39730.5, 39730.6, 39730.7, and 39730.8 to the Cal.
Health and Safety Code, and added Chapter 13.1 (commencing with Section 42652)
to Part 3 of Division 30 of the Cal. Pub. Res. Code, establishing methane
emissions reduction targets in a statewide effort to reduce emissions of short-
lived climate pollutants as amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced
from time to time.
   SB 1383 REGULATIONS. For the purposes of this chapter, the regulations
developed by CalRecycle to implement SB 1383.
   SELF-HAULER. A person who hauls solid waste, organic waste or recyclable
material he or she has generated to another person. SELF-HAULER also includes a
person who back-hauls waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(66).
Back-haul means generating and transporting organic waste to a destination
owned and operated by the generator using the generator's own employees and
equipment, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(66)(A).
   SINGLE-FAMILY. Of, from, or pertaining to any residential premises with
fewer than five units.
   SOLID WASTE. Has the same meaning as defined in Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 40191,
which defines SOLID WASTE as all putrescible and non-putrescible solid,
semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish,
ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned
vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances,
dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous
waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, and other
discarded solid and semisolid wastes, with the exception that SOLID WASTE does
not include any of the following wastes:
      (1)   Hazardous waste, as defined in the Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 40141;
      (2)   Radioactive waste regulated pursuant to the State Radiation Control
Law (Chapter 8 (commencing with § 114960) of Part 9 of Division 104 of the Cal.
Health and Safety Code);
      (3)   Medical waste regulated pursuant to the State Medical Waste
Management Act (Part 14 (commencing with § 117600) of Division 104 of the Cal.
Health and Safety Code). Untreated medical waste shall not be disposed of in a
solid waste landfill, as defined in Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 40195.1. Medical
waste that has been treated and deemed to be SOLID WASTE shall be regulated
pursuant to Division 30 of the Cal. Pub. Res. Code.
   SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE OF THE CITY. Solid waste collection service
provided by the city or such service provided by a collector who has entered
into a contract with the city, or who holds a franchise from the city, to
collect solid waste within the city, depending on whether the city is providing
such service with city personnel or by contract or franchise with a private
collector.
   SOURCE SEPARATED. Materials, including commingled recyclable materials, that
have been separated or kept separate from the solid waste stream, at the point
of generation, for the purpose of additional sorting or processing those
materials for recycling or reuse in order to return them to the economic
mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted
products, which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the
marketplace, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 17402.5(b)(4). For the
purposes of the chapter, SOURCE SEPARATED shall include separation of materials
by the generator, property owner, property owner's employee, property manager,
or property manager's employee into different containers for the purpose of
collection such that SOURCE SEPARATED materials are separated from black
container waste or other solid waste for the purposes of collection and
processing.
   SOURCE SEPARATED GREEN CONTAINER ORGANIC WASTE. Source separated organic
waste that can be placed in a green container that is specifically intended for
the separate collection of organic waste by the generator, excluding pet waste,
carpets, non-compostable paper, and textiles.
   SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Source separated non- organic
recyclables.
   STATE. The State of California.
   SUPERMARKET. A full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual sales
of $2,000,000 or more and which sells a line of dry grocery, canned goods, or
nonfood items and some perishable items, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(71).
   TIER ONE COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR.
      (1)   A commercial edible food generator that is one of the following as
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(73):
         (a)   Supermarket;
         (b)   Grocery store with a total facility size equal to or greater
than 10,000 square feet;
         (c)   Food service provider;
         (d)   Food distributor;
         (e)   Wholesale food vendor.
      (2)   If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(73) of TIER ONE COMMERCIAL
EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(73) shall apply to this chapter.
   TIER TWO COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR.
      (1)   A commercial edible food generator that is one of the following as
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a):
         (a)   Restaurant with 250 or more seats or a total facility size equal
to or greater than 5,000 square feet;
         (b)   Hotel with an on-site food facility and 200 or more rooms;
         (c)   Health facility with an on-site food facility and 100 or more
beds;
         (d)   Large venue;
         (e)   Large event;
         (f)   A state agency with a cafeteria with 250 or more seats or total
cafeteria facility size equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet;
         (g)   A local education agency facility with an on-site food facility.
      (2)   If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(74) of TIER TWO COMMERCIAL
EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(74) shall apply to this chapter.
   WHOLESALE FOOD VENDOR. A business or establishment engaged in the merchant
wholesale distribution of food, where food (including fruits and vegetables) is
received, shipped, stored, prepared for distribution to a retailer, warehouse,
distributor, or other destination, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 189852
(a)(76).
(`67 Code, § 4-3-1) (Ord. 71-4, passed 6-28-71; Ord. 75-04, passed 6-2-75; Am.
Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22)
§ 50.02 REQUIREMENT TO USE SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE; NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   All dwellings, apartment houses and places of business in which refuse
accumulates within the city shall be required to use solid waste collection
service of the city and to pay the charges therefor. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation, except as provided in this chapter, to collect
or gather solid waste within the city.
   (B)   The City Council may contract for the collection or disposal, or both,
of solid waste under such terms and conditions as the City Council may
prescribe by resolution or ordinance, as provided in Cal. Pub. Res. Code §
49300. The contract may be "exclusive or nonexclusive". The collector shall
comply with the terms and conditions of the city code as well as such other
terms and conditions as may be prescribed by resolution.
(`67 Code, § 4-3-2)
   (C)   In the event that trash, garden waste, lawn and tree trimmings, and
the like, are piled adjacent to an alley or city street without the benefit of
a suitable container, the property owner or responsible tenant shall, upon
written notification by the city, promptly deposit the litter in adequate
containers for refuse pick-up. Failure to respond after ten days to a written
request made by the city shall serve as authorization to the city to remove the
litter and subject the property owner or responsible tenant to the charges
specified in the nonconforming refuse collection fees.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a generator from preventing or
reducing waste generation, managing organic waste on site, or using a community
composting site pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(c).
(`67 Code, § 4-3-15)
(Ord. 71-16, passed 11-22-71; Ord. 75-04, passed 6-2-75; Am. Ord. 2022- 001,
passed 4-12-22)
§ 50.03 TRASH ACCUMULATIONS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any occupant or owner of any building, lot or
premises in the city to allow or permit to collect or remain upon such premises
any solid waste in such manner or quantity as is a fire menace or a health
hazard to the people of the city.
(`67 Code, § 4-3-3) (Am. Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22)
§ 50.04 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow,
aid, suffer or maintain any open burning of any kind upon any public place,
street or alley within the city at any time.
   (B)   Private premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow,
suffer or maintain any open burning of any kind or the burning of any solid
waste in any incinerator, barrel, can, pit, outdoor fireplace or similar
container or enclosure upon any private premises within the city.
   (C)   Nonapplicability. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
the following:
      (1)   An indoor or outdoor barbecue or similar heating or cooking device
while being used for the heating or cooking of food for human consumption, or
for recreational purposes, and not being used primarily for the burning of
waste materials or solid waste;
      (2)   Comfort heating by use of a fireplace inside a residence, which
fireplace is not being used primarily for the burning of waste materials or
solid waste;
      (3)   An approved type incinerator or furnace used by a hospital or
similar establishment for the incineration of body parts, bandages or related
solid waste;
      (4)   Controlled fires for the purpose of training firefighters;
      (5)   A fire set or permission given by an official of the fire district
personnel for the purpose of prevention of a fire or health hazard or the
disposal of waste materials which cannot be abated or disposed of by other
reasonable means; or
      (6)   Fires used as safety flares for the combustion of waste gases.
(`67 Code, § 4-3-4) (Ord. 71-4, passed 6-28-71; Am. Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-
22)
§ 50.05 BURNING, BURYING OR DUMPING GARBAGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn, bury or dump, or permit
to be burned, buried or dumped, any solid waste in any place within the city.
(`67 Code, § 4-3-5)
   (B)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful to
deposit or allow to remain on any premises, vacant lot, street, alley, or in
any excavation, any offal, garbage, dead animals, or any putrid, decaying, or
offensive animal or vegetable matter.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-8)
   (C)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful to
deposit or allow to remain in any street, alley, public park or other publicly-
owned property, any of the following: scrap building materials, discarded
boxes, cartons, earth, concrete, bricks, waste construction materials, tin or
metal cans, bottles, glass, rags, paper, lawn trimmings or clippings, garden
trimmings, garden refuse, small tree or shrub prunings, any waste materials
resulting from gardening, and any and all household items which have been
discarded or are no longer desired by the owner thereof.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-21)
(Ord. 84-09, passed 7-23-84; Am. Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.06 SOLID COLLECTION SERVICE; RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Containers.
      (1)   Prior to collection, all solid waste shall be stored in approved
automated collection containers provided by the city's collector, unless an
alternative is approved pursuant to §
50.07.
      (2)   The city's collector will not remove or cause to be removed from
the premises any refuse which is not so contained, except as otherwise provided
in this section.
   (B)   Single-family organic waste generators shall subscribe to city's
organic waste collection services for all organic waste generated. The city
shall have the right to review the number and size of a generator's containers
to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type of collection service
for proper separation of materials and containment of materials; and single-
family generators shall adjust their service level for their collection
services as requested by the city. Generators may additionally manage their
organic waste by preventing or reducing their organic waste, managing organic
waste on site, and/or using a community composting site pursuant to 14 CCR §
18984.9(c).
   (C)   Single-family organic waste generators shall participate in the city's
organic waste collection service(s) by placing designated materials in
designated containers as described below, and shall not place prohibited
container contaminants in collection containers.
      (1)   A two-container collection service (green container and black
container).
         (a)   Generator shall place source separated green container organic
waste, including food waste, in the green container; and black container waste
in the black container. Generators shall not place materials designated for the
black container into the green container.
(`67 Code, § 4-3-6)
   (D)   Frequency of collection. The city's collector shall collect solid
waste a minimum of once each week from all dwelling units in the city. The
city's collector shall collect recyclables in the city once every week based on
a scheduling calendar approved by the City Manager and provided to city
residents each year by the city's collector.
   (E)   Types of residential service.
      (1)   Curb service. All curb and alley service customers shall place the
refuse container at the curb in the street or in the alley not later than 6:00
a.m. on the day of collection and shall remove the refuse containers from the
curb or alley on the same day as collection.
      (2)   Alley service. Where alley service is provided, containers must be
placed upon the customer's premises, immediately adjacent to and accessible
from the alley without the necessity of entering the premises. Containers shall
be placed to provide the necessary clearance from obstructions on either side
of the container as well as overhead clearance needed for the collection
vehicle to empty the contents of the container without causing damage to public
or private property.
      (3)   Walk-in service. Walk-in service is available to those customers
who have applied to and have been approved by the City Manager. This service
shall be limited to only those dwellings where there is no able-bodied resident
capable of placing the container in the approved location. If approved by the
City Manager, there shall be no additional charge for this service.
      (4)   Containerized service. Containerized service may be used for
apartments, multiple-family dwellings, single-family dwellings, and for places
of business.
(`67 Code, § 4-3-7)
(Ord. 71-4, passed 6-28-71; Ord. 71-16, passed 11-22-71; Am. Ord. 2003- 005,
passed 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22)
§ 50.07 REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICE; COMMERCIAL.
   Commercial businesses, which include multi-family residential dwellings,
shall comply with the following:
   (A)   Containers. Prior to collection, all solid waste shall be stored in
approved locked, front-loaded bins provided by the city's collector, unless an
alternative is approved pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Except commercial businesses that meet the self-hauler requirements in
§
50.12, be automatically enrolled in the city's two-container organic waste
collection. As approved by the City Manager, or his or her designee, the city
shall have the authority to change the minimum required service levels over
time. The commercial business' organic waste service level must be sufficient
for the amount of source separated green container organic waste generated by
the commercial business. The city shall have the right to review the number,
size, and location of a generator's containers and frequency of collection to
evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type of collection service for
proper separation of materials and containment of materials; and, commercial
business shall adjust its service level for its collection services as
requested by the city.
   (C)   Except commercial businesses that meet the self-hauler requirements in
§
50.12, participate in and comply with the city's two-container (green container
and black container) collection service by placing designated materials in
designated containers. Generator shall place source separated green container
organic waste, including food waste, in the green container; and black
container waste in the black container. Generators shall not place materials
designated for the black container into the green container.
   (D)   Supply and allow access to adequate number, size, and location of
collection containers with sufficient labels or colors (conforming with
divisions (E)(1) and (2) below), for employees, contractors, tenants and
customers, consistent with city's green container and black container
collection service.
   (E)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, provide containers for
the collection of source separated green container organic waste, and source
separated recyclable materials in all indoor and outdoor areas where disposal
containers are provided for customers, for materials generated by that
business. Such containers do not need to be provided in restrooms. If a
commercial business does not generate any of the materials that would be
collected in one type of container, then the business does not have to provide
that particular container in all areas where disposal containers are provided
for customers. Pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b), the containers provided by the
business shall have either:
      (1)   A body or lid that conforms with the container colors provided
through the collection service provided by the city with either lids conforming
to the color requirements or bodies conforming to the color requirements or
both lids and bodies conforming to color requirements. A commercial business is
not required to replace functional containers, including containers purchased
prior to January 1, 2022, that do not comply with the requirements of the
subsection prior to the end of the useful life of those containers, or prior to
January 1, 2036, whichever comes first.
      (2)   Container labels that include language or graphic images or both
indicating the primary material accepted and the primary materials prohibited
in that container or containers with imprinted text or graphic images that
indicate the primary materials accepted and primary materials prohibited in the
container. Pursuant 14 CCR § 18984.8, the container labels are required on new
containers commencing January 1, 2022.
   (F)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, prohibit employees from
placing materials in a container not designated for those materials per the
city's organic waste, and non-organic waste collection service to the extent
practical through education, training, inspection, and/or other measures.
   (G)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, periodically inspect
green container and black containers for contamination and inform employees if
containers are contaminated and of the requirements to keep contaminants out of
those containers pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b)(3).
   (H)   Annually provide information to employees, contractors, tenants, and
customers about organic waste recovery requirements and about proper sorting of
source separated green container organic waste.
   (I)    Provide education information before or within 14 days of occupation
of the premises to new tenants that describes requirements to keep source
separated green container organic waste separate from black container Waste
(when applicable) and the location of containers and the rules governing their
use at each property.
   (J)   Provide or arrange access for the city or its agent to their
properties during all inspections conducted in accordance with §
50.19 to confirm compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (K)   At commercial business' option and subject to any approval required
from the city, implement a remote monitoring program for inspection of the
contents of its green containers and black containers for the purpose of
monitoring the contents of containers to determine appropriate levels of
service and to identify prohibited container contaminants. Generators may
install remote monitoring devices on or in the green containers and black
containers subject to written notification to or approval by the city or its
designee.
   (L)   If a commercial business wants to self-haul, meet the self-hauler
requirements in §
50.12 of this chapter.
   (M)   Commercial businesses that are tier one or tier two commercial edible
food generators shall comply with food recovery requirements, pursuant to §
50.09.
   (N)   Frequency of collection. Collection of refuse shall be made at least
once a week from all businesses in the city, but as many times per week as the
City Manager may order, from all businesses which generate garbage as defined
in this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 4-3-8) (Ord. 71-16, passed 11-22-71; Am. Ord. 2006-012, passed 10-
23-06; Am. Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22)
§ 50.08 WAIVERS FOR GENERATORS.
   (A)   De minimis waivers. The city may waive a commercial business'
obligation (including multi-family residential dwellings) to comply with some
or all of the organic waste requirements of this chapter if the commercial
business provides documentation that the business generates below a certain
amount of organic waste material as described in division (A)(2) below.
Commercial businesses requesting a de minimis waiver shall:
      (1)   Submit an application specifying the services that they are
requesting a waiver from and provide documentation as noted in division (2)
below.
      (2)   Provide documentation that either:
         (a)   The commercial business' total solid waste collection service is
two cubic yards or more per week and organic waste subject to collection in a
green container comprises less than 20 gallons per week per applicable
container of the business' total waste; or
         (b)   The commercial business' total solid waste collection service is
less than two cubic yards per week and organic waste subject to collection in a
green container comprises less than ten gallons per week per applicable
container of the business' total waste.
      (3)   Notify the city within 30 days if circumstances change such that
commercial business's organic waste exceeds threshold required for waiver, in
which case waiver will be rescinded.
      (4)   Provide written verification of eligibility for de minimis waiver
every five years, if the city has approved de minimis waiver.
   (B)   Physical space waivers. The city may waive a commercial business' or
property owner's obligations (including multi-family residential dwellings) to
comply with some or all of organic waste collection service requirements if the
city has evidence from its own staff, a hauler, licensed architect, or licensed
engineer demonstrating that the premises lacks adequate space for the
collection containers required for compliance with the organic waste collection
requirements of §§
50.06 and
50.07. A commercial business or property owner may request a physical space
waiver through the following process:
      (1)   Submit an application specifying the type(s) of collection services
for which they are requesting a compliance waiver.
      (2)   Provide documentation that the premises lacks adequate space for
green containers including documentation from its hauler, licensed architect,
licensed engineer or by verification after a site visit from a city enforcement
official.
      (3)   Provide written verification to the city that it is still eligible
for physical space waiver every five years, if the city has approved
application for a physical space waiver.
(Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22)
§ 50.09 REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATORS.
   (A)   Tier one commercial edible food generators must comply with the
requirements of this section commencing January 1, 2022, and tier two
commercial edible food generators must comply commencing January 1, 2024,
pursuant to 14 CCR § 18991.3.
   (B)   Large venue or large event operators not providing food services, but
allowing for food to be provided by others, shall require food facilities
operating at the large venue or large event to comply with the requirements of
this section, commencing January 1, 2024.
   (C)   Commercial edible food generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
      (1)   Arrange to recover the maximum amount of edible food that would
otherwise be disposed;
      (2)   Contract with or enter into a written agreement with food recovery
organizations or food recovery services for: (i) the collection of edible food
for food recovery; or (ii) acceptance of the edible food that the commercial
edible food generator self-hauls to the food recovery organization for food
recovery;
      (3)   Shall not intentionally spoil edible food that is capable of being
recovered by a food recovery organization or a food recovery service;
      (4)   Allow the city's designated enforcement entity or designated third
party enforcement entity to access the premises and review records pursuant to
14 CCR § 18991.4;
      (5)   Keep records that include the following information, or as
otherwise specified in 14 CCR § 18991.4:
         (a)   A list of each food recovery service or organization that
collects or receives its edible food pursuant to a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b);
         (b)   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under
14 CCR § 18991.3(b);
         (c)   A record of the following information for each of those food
recovery services or food recovery organizations:
            1.   The name, address and contact information of the food recovery
service or food recovery organization;
            2.   The types of food that will be collected by or self-hauled to
the food recovery service or food recovery organization;
            3.   The established frequency that food will be collected or self-
hauled;
            4.   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per month,
collected or self-hauled to a food recovery service or food recovery
organization for food recovery.
      (6)   No later than April of each year commencing no later than April
2023 for tier one commercial edible food generators and April 2025 for tier two
commercial edible food generators provide an annual food recovery report to the
city that includes the information from division (5) above.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or conflict with
the protections provided by the California Good Samaritan Food Donation Act of
2017, the Federal Good Samaritan Act, or share table and school food donation
guidance pursuant to Senate Bill 557 of 2017 (approved by the Governor of the
State of California on September 25, 2017, which added Article 13 (commencing
with Section 49580) to Chapter 9 of Part 27 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the
Cal. Education Code, and to amend Section 114079 of the Cal. Health and Safety
Code, relating to food safety, as amended, supplemented, superseded and
replaced from time to time).
(Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22)
§ 50.10 REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATIONS AND SERVICES AND REGIONAL
AGENCIES.
   (A)   Food recovery services collecting or receiving edible food directly
from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written agreement
established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following records, or
as otherwise specified by 14 CCR § 18991.5(a)(1):
      (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the service collects edible food;
      (2)   The quantity in pounds of edible food collected from each
commercial edible food generator per month;
      (3)   The quantity in pounds of edible food transported to each food
recovery organization per month;
      (4)   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
organization that the food recovery service transports edible food to for food
recovery.
   (B)   Food recovery organizations collecting or receiving edible food
directly from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following
records, or as otherwise specified by 14 CCR § 18991.5(a)(2):
      (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the organization receives edible food;
      (2)   The quantity in pounds of edible food received from each commercial
edible food generator per month;
      (3)   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
service that the organization receives edible food from for food recovery.
   (C)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services shall inform
generators about California and Federal Good Samaritan Food Donation Act
protection in written communications, such as in their contract or agreement
established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b).
   (D)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services that have their
primary address physically located in the city and contract with or have
written agreements with one or more commercial edible food generators pursuant
to 14 CCR § 18991.3(b) shall report to the city it is located in the total
pounds of edible food recovered in the previous calendar year from the tier one
and tier two commercial edible food generators they have established a contract
or written agreement with pursuant to 14 CCR § 18991.3(b) no later than April
of each year.
   (E)   Food recovery capacity planning. 
      (1)   Food recovery services and food recovery organizations. In order to
support edible food recovery capacity planning assessments or other studies
conducted by the county, city, special district that provides solid waste
collection services, or its designated entity, food recovery services and food
recovery organizations operating in the city shall provide information and
consultation to the city, upon request, regarding existing, or proposed new or
expanded, food recovery capacity that could be accessed by the city and its
commercial edible food generators. A food recovery service or food recovery
organization contacted by the city shall respond to such request for
information within 60 days, unless a shorter timeframe is otherwise specified
by the city.
(Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22)
§ 50.11 REQUIREMENTS FOR HAULERS AND FACILITY OPERATORS.
   (A)   Requirements for haulers.
      (1)   Exclusive franchise hauler, non-exclusive franchised haulers,
permitted haulers, and licensed haulers providing residential, commercial, or
industrial organic waste collection services to generators within the city's
boundaries shall meet the following requirements and standards as a condition
of approval of a contract, agreement, or other authorization with the city to
collect organic waste:
         (a)   Through written notice to the city annually on or before April
1, identify the facilities to which they will transport organic waste including
facilities for source separated recyclable materials, and source separated
green container organic waste.
         (b)   Transport source separated recyclable materials, and source
separated green container organic waste to a facility, operation, activity, or
property that recovers organic waste as defined in 14 CCR Division 7, Chapter
12, Article 2.
         (c)   Obtain approval from the city to haul organic waste, unless it
is transporting source separated organic waste to a community composting site
or lawfully transporting C&D in a manner that complies with 14 CCR § 18989.1,
and the Riverbank Municipal Code.
      (2)   Exclusive franchise hauler, non-exclusive franchised haulers,
permitted haulers, and licensed haulers authorization to collect organic waste
shall comply with education, equipment, signage, container labeling, container
color, contamination monitoring, reporting, and other requirements contained
within its franchise agreement, permit, license, or other agreement entered
into with the city.
   (B)   Requirements for facility operators and community composting
operations.
      (1)   Owners of facilities, operations, and activities that recover
organic waste, including, but not limited to, compost facilities, in-vessel
digestion facilities, and publicly-owned treatment works shall, upon the city's
request, provide information regarding available and potential new or expanded
capacity at their facilities, operations, and activities, including information
about throughput and permitted capacity necessary for planning purposes.
Entities contacted by the city shall respond within 60 days.
      (2)   Community composting operators, upon the city's request, shall
provide information to the city to support organic waste capacity planning,
including, but not limited to, an estimate of the amount of organic waste
anticipated to be handled at the community composting operation. Entities
contacted by the city shall respond within 60 days.
(Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22)
§ 50.12 SELF-HAULER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Self-haulers shall source separate organic waste (materials that the
city otherwise requires generators to separate for collection in the city's
organics and collection program) generated on-site from solid waste in a manner
consistent with 14 CCR § 18984.2, or shall haul organic waste to a high
diversion organic waste processing facility as specified in 14 CCR § 18984.3.
   (B)   Self-haulers shall haul their source separated green container organic
waste to a solid waste facility, operation, activity, or property that
processes or recovers source separated organic waste. Alternatively, self-
haulers may haul organic waste to a high diversion organic waste processing
facility.
   (C)   Self-haulers that are commercial businesses (including multi-family
residential dwellings) shall keep a record of the amount of organic waste
delivered to each solid waste facility, operation, activity, or property that
processes or recovers organic waste; this record shall be subject to inspection
by the city's enforcement official. The records shall include the following
information:
      (1)   Delivery receipts and weight tickets from the entity accepting the
waste;
      (2)   The amount of material in cubic yards or tons transported by the
generator to each entity;
      (3)   If the material is transported to an entity that does not have
scales on-site, or employs scales incapable of weighing the self-hauler's
vehicle in a manner that allows it to determine the weight of materials
received, the self-hauler is not required to record the weight of material but
shall keep a record of the entities that received the organic waste.
   (D)   A residential organic waste generator that self-hauls organic waste is
not required to record or report information in division (C) above.
(Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22)
§ 50.13 ANTI-SCAVENGING.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone other than the authorized refuse collector
to remove any recyclable material placed in a container provided and maintained
by the authorized solid waste collector.
(Ord. 95-12, passed 11-13-95; Am. Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.14 CITY MAY DESIGNATE LOCATION OF DISPOSAL; FRANCHISED COLLECTOR TO
FURNISH CONTAINERS.
   (A)   The city may, by written notice to the franchised solid waste
collector, designate the location, including waste-to-energy facilities, where
solid waste from the city shall be delivered for disposal.
   (B)   The franchised solid waste collector shall furnish and maintain all
containers at his or her sole cost and expense. All bins one yard and greater
in size located within the public right-of-way shall have reflective tape a
minimum of 24 square inches in area placed on the corners of the bin and three
feet from the bottom of the bin.
(`67 Code, § 4-3-10) (Ord. 86-17, passed 6-23-86; Am. Ord. 2003-002, passed 2-
24-03; Am. Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22)
§ 50.15 RATES TO BE CHARGED.
   (A)   Rates established. Rates, fees, and charges for automatic garbage and
refuse collection services specified in this chapter are established by
resolution, which may be amended from time to time, and shall be charged for
those services.
   (B)   Billing. All garbage, refuse, and recycling fees shall be billed on a
bimonthly basis. The bimonthly bill shall reflect double the monthly rate for
garbage, refuse, and recycling services.
   (C)   Increase or decrease in rates. The rates for garbage collection set
forth herein shall be increased or decreased by resolution of the City Council.
(`67 Code, § 4-3-10) (Ord. 91-05, passed 4-22-91; Am. Ord. 2001-08, passed 10-
8-01; Am. Ord. 2003-006, passed 6-9-03; Am. Ord. 2005-015, passed 10-24-05; Am.
Ord. 2005-017, passed 11-14-05; Am. Ord. 2006-012, passed 10-23-06; Am. Ord.
2014-007, passed 9-23-14; Am. Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22; Am. Ord. 2022-005,
passed 9-27-22)
§ 50.16 DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Applicants for utility services are required to establish credit
before receiving such service. Credit shall be deemed established if the
applicant meets one of the following options:
      (1)   Makes a cash deposit of $40 as a guarantee for the payment of
future bills.
      (2)   Has been a customer of city utility services for 12 consecutive
months within the last 18 months, and during such time has paid all bills
without any delinquency.
      (3)   Provide the city with a letter of credit reference from another
utility company showing an on-time payment record for the period of at least
the 12 consecutive months directly prior to the date of the requested service.
   (B)   If a consumer fails to pay a bill for garbage and refuse collection
services, the city may apply the deposit insofar as necessary to liquidate the
account and may require that the deposit be restored to an amount twice the
original deposit amount.
   (C)   After a cash deposit to guarantee payment for garbage and refuse
service has stood unimpaired for 12 months, such deposit shall be applied to
the depositor's current account balance. Upon closing any account, the balance
of any deposit remaining, after the closing bill for service has been paid,
shall be returned promptly to the depositor.
(Ord. 2022-005, passed 9-27-22)
§ 50.17 METHOD OF COLLECTION OF RATES BY CITY.
   The following provisions shall be applicable to and determine the method of
collection of such solid waste rates by the city:
   (A)   The charge for solid waste service shall be added to the charges for
water service and/or sewer service and payment of the total amount must be made
in accordance with city rules regulating the payment of water service charges.
   (B)   Delinquent payment of charges for solid waste service shall be treated
in the same manner as delinquency for payment of water service charges and/or
sewer service charges.
   (C)   All charges for solid waste collection shall be billed to the
following persons:
      (1)   In the case of any person whose premises are connected with the
municipal water system, then to the person who requested such connection to the
municipal water system or his or her successor in interest, to any person
requesting that such bill be charged to him or her.
      (2)   In the case of any person whose premises are not connected to the
municipal water system, then to the person who requested the connection to the
sewage system or his or her successor in interest, or if no such request was
made, then to the owner of record of such premises on the date on which such
premises are required hereby to commence garbage and trash collection services,
or to the successors in interest to such person, or to any person requesting
that such bill be charged to him or her.
   (D)   Each charge for solid waste collection service levied pursuant to this
section on any premises within the city is hereby made a lien upon such
premises, and any steps authorized by law may be taken by the city to enforce
payment of such lien.
   (E)   In each case where a bill for solid waste collection service shall
become delinquent, the City Manager shall cause the premises to be disconnected
from the municipal water and/or sewage system pursuant to the procedures set
forth in §
52.66. Whenever premises have been disconnected from either or both the
municipal water system and the municipal sewage system for nonpayment of
garbage and trash collection charges, such premises shall not be reconnected to
either the municipal water system or the municipal sewage system until all
delinquent fees, charges and rates have been paid, together with such
reasonable charges for reconnection as may be established from time to time by
resolution adopted by the City Council.
(`67 Code, § 4-3-12) (Am. Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22)
§ 50.18 OWNERS’ LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF SERVICES TO MULTIPLE DWELLINGS.
   Owners of multiple dwellings or apartments (two or more families) shall be
responsible for the payment of solid waste collection services rendered to
premises owned by them, although payments will be accepted from tenants.
However, for convenience to the city, persons billed for water service will
also be billed for solid waste collection service.
(`67 Code, § 4-3-13) (Am. Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22)
§ 50.19 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS BY CITY.
   (A)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, are authorized to conduct
inspections and investigations, at random or otherwise, of any collection
container, collection vehicle loads, or transfer, processing, or disposal
facility for materials collected from generators, or source separated materials
to confirm compliance with this chapter by organic waste generators, commercial
businesses (including multi-family residential dwellings), property owners,
commercial edible food generators, haulers, self-haulers, food recovery
services, and food recovery organizations, subject to applicable laws. This
section does not allow the city to enter the interior of a private residential
property for inspection.
   (B)   A person shall provide or arrange for access during all inspections
(with the exception of residential property interiors) and shall cooperate with
the City Manager, or his or designee, during such inspections and
investigations. Such inspections and investigations may include confirmation of
proper placement of materials in containers, edible food recovery activities,
records, or any other requirement of this chapter described herein. Failure to
provide or arrange for: (i) access to an entity's premises or (ii) access to
records for any inspection or investigation is a violation of this chapter and
may result in penalties described.
   (C)   Any records obtained by the City Manager, or his or her designee,
during its inspections, and other reviews, shall be subject to the requirements
and applicable disclosure exemptions of the Public Records Act as set forth in
Cal. Gov’t Code § 6250 et seq.
   (D)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, are authorized to conduct
any inspections, or other investigations as reasonably necessary to further the
goals of this chapter, subject to applicable laws.
   (E)   The city shall receive written complaints from persons regarding an
entity that may be potentially noncompliant with SB 1383 regulations, including
receipt of anonymous complaints.
(Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-12-22)
§ 50.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall enforce the provisions
of this chapter, subject to the approval of the City Council, and shall have
the power to establish rules and regulations, consistent with the provisions of
this chapter, governing the keeping, collection, removal and disposal of solid
waste.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute an
infraction and will be grounds for issuance of a notice of violation and
assessment of a fine by a City Manager, or his or her designee. Absent
compliance by the respondent within the deadline set forth in the notice of
violation, the City Manager or designated enforcement agency shall commence an
action to impose penalties, pursuant to the city's standard procedures or the
standard procedures.
   (C)   A violation may be punishable by:
      (1)   A fine of $100 for a first violation;
      (2)   A fine of $200 for a second violation of the same provision of this
code within any 12 consecutive-month period;
      (3)   A fine of $500 for each additional violation of the same provision
of this code within any 12 consecutive-month period. Any violation after the
third violation of the same provision of this chapter within any 12
consecutive-month period may be charged so each day that a violation of this
chapter continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (D)   Other remedies allowed by law may be used, including civil action or
prosecution as misdemeanor. The city may pursue civil actions in the California
courts to seek recovery of unpaid administrative citations. The city may choose
to delay court action until such time as a sufficiently large number of
violations, or cumulative size of violations exist such that court action is a
reasonable use of city staff and resources.
   (E)   Compliance deadline extension considerations. The city may extend the
compliance deadlines set forth in a notice of violation issued in accordance
with this section if it finds that there are extenuating circumstances beyond
the control of the respondent that make compliance within the deadlines
impracticable, including the following:
      (1)   Acts of God such as earthquakes, wildfires, flooding, and other
emergencies or natural disasters;
      (2)   Delays in obtaining discretionary permits or other government
agency approvals; or
      (3)   Deficiencies in organic waste recycling infrastructure or edible
food recovery capacity and the city is under a corrective action plan with
CalRecycle pursuant to 14 CCR § 18996.2 due to those deficiencies.
   (F)   Appeals process. Persons assessed a penalty for an uncorrected
violation may request a hearing to appeal the citation within 30 days of the
assessment of the penalty by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk.
Evidence may be presented at the hearing. The city will appoint a hearing
officer who shall conduct the hearing and issue a final written order. The
hearing shall be conducted in accordance with city's procedure.
(`67 Code, § 4-3-14) (Ord. 71-4, passed 6-28-71; Am. Ord. 2022-001, passed 4-
12-22)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Sanitary sewage permit; billing procedures
   
51.03   Rates and charges
   
51.04   Harmful substances prohibited
   
51.05   Violations
   
51.06   Violator to reimburse city's costs
   
51.07   Unsanitary discharges
   
51.08   Privies; water closets
   
51.09   Service lateral private property
Industrial Wastewater
   
51.20   Purpose and policy
   
51.21   Administration
   
51.22   Abbreviations
   
51.23   Definitions
   
51.24   General sewer use requirements
   
51.25   Pretreatment of wastewater
   
51.26   Wastewater discharge permit application
   
51.27   Wastewater discharge permit issuance process
   
51.28   Reporting requirements
   
51.29   Compliance monitoring
   
51.30   Confidential information
   
51.31   Publication of users in significant noncompliance
   
51.32   Administrative enforcement remedies
   
51.33   Establishment of fees
Fats, Oils and Greases (FOG)
   
51.40   Purpose and policy
   
51.41   Definitions
   
51.42   Administration
   
51.43   Regulation
   
51.44   Waterwater discharge limitations
   
51.45   Enforcement
   
51.46   FOG reduction practices
Cross-reference:
   Systems Development Fees, see §§ 150.30 through 150.36
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter the following terms and phrases shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
   FULL KITCHENS. An eating establishment with a garbage disposal.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Liquids and/or solids contained with a liquid, other than
sanitary sewage, and discharged into either the industrial waste system or
sanitary sewage system.
   MINIMUM RATE. A minimum rate of $20.15 per month, which shall be charged to
each customer per month during the two-month billing cycle.
   PERSON. Any natural person, corporation, partnership, trust, or any legal
entity.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. Waste discharging into the city sewage system and
containing human or animal excreta.
   SANITARY SEWER MAIN. An underground pipe owned and maintained by the city
which transports from more than one residence, parcel or property to eventually
be treated at the City of Riverbank Wastewater Treatment Plant.
   SCHOOL FACILITIES. Shall include any education facilities wherein teachers
and students assemble for the purpose of educational instruction.
   SERVICE LATERAL. The sewer pipes that lead from a home or business to the
sanitary sewer main or regional trunk line in the public right-of-way.
(`67 Code, § 4-4-1) (Am. Ord. 2000-06, passed 5-8-00; Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed
7-9-01; Am. Ord. 2003-007, passed 6-9-03; Am. Ord. 2004-004, passed 6-28-04;
Am. Ord. 2004-007, passed 9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2005-013, passed 7-11-05; Am. Ord.
2006-11, passed 7-10-06; Am. Ord. 2007-004, passed 7-9-07; Am. Ord. 2008-006,
passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 2013-001, passed 4-22-13)
§ 51.02 SANITARY SEWAGE PERMIT; BILLING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the Director of Public
Works to commence or make any connection with any public or house connection
sewer or to do or cause to be done, or to construct or cause to be constructed,
or to use or cause to be used, or to alter or cause to be altered, any public
or house connection sewer within the city without first obtaining a permit from
the Plumbing Inspector so to do.
   (B)   Any person desiring a permit for any of the purposes enumerated in
this section, shall make application in writing to the Plumbing Inspector,
giving such information as the Inspector may require, on blanks to be furnished
for that purpose, and if it appears that the work to be performed thereunder is
to be done according to the regulations contained in this chapter and otherwise
provided by law governing the construction of said work, a permit shall be
issued upon payment of the fees as fixed by ordinance.
   (C)   Rates and charges for domestic sewage disposal service are hereby
established as hereinafter set forth. The charges herein fixed for any premises
shall be billed and collected with the charges and rates for city utility
services furnished by the city to the premises. The charges herein fixed shall
be due and payable in advance at the same time that such charges for city
utility services are due and payable.
   (D)   In the event the premises to be charged for sewer service shall not be
connected to the water distribution system then and in that event, Water
Department shall bill and collect for the appropriate sewer service charges.
   (E)   All sewer service revenues collected, shall be retained by the city
regardless of the date of termination of sewer service and no rebate will be
made for mid-month disconnection.
   (F)   For any sewer service bill that is not paid by the close of business
35 days after the bill was issued shall be subject to a 10% penalty.
   (G)   Charges for services and facilities furnished by the city shall
constitute a lien against the lot or parcel of land against which charge is
imposed if such charges remain delinquent for a period of 60 days.
   (H)   In the event the owner, occupant or lessee of premises connected to
the sewer system shall fail to pay the sewer charges within 60 days after it
becomes delinquent, the city may in addition to all of the remedies it may
have, discontinue furnishing sewer service by means of water service
disconnection pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
52.66, and shall not resume the same until all delinquent charges and penalties
hereunder together with any service charge necessitated by the resumption of
sewer service have been fully paid.
   (I)   As an alternative to any of the other procedures herein provided or
given by law, city may bring an action against the owner, occupant or lessee of
the premises to whom the service was rendered for the collection of the amount
of the delinquent rate and all penalties and costs of collection including
reasonable attorney's fees.
(`67 Code, § 4-4-3) (Ord. 88, passed 3-21-49; Ord. 70-13, passed 9-18-70; Am.
Ord. 2022-005, passed 9-27-22)
§ 51.03 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Inspection fee. An inspection fee of $30 for building inspection
services shall be paid to the city.
   (B)   Connection fees. Connection fees for sewer service for properties not
in the city on October 14, 1963 shall be paid to the city as follows:
      (1)   Single-family residence (when connection is made to existing
lateral): $4,420;
      (2)   Single-family residence (when connection is made to house
connection stub behind the curb or at the property line in the alley): $400;
      (3)   Duplex or triplex (each unit): $400;
      (4)   Multiple housing (apartments, condominiums, mobile homes or in
manufactured housing in parks or special projects, each unit): $400;
      (5)   Commercial establishments (domestic sewage only, each unit):
$1,000;
      (6)   Commercial establishments discharging dishwater, including, but not
limited to, laundromats, carwashes or discharges from garbage grinders. First
1,000 square feet of floor area: $1,200 each, and 100 square feet, or fraction,
additional floor area: $100 each;
      (7)   Industrial establishments (domestic sewage only) each unit: $1,000;
and
      (8)   Industrial establishments (discharges from industrial use); to be
negotiated.
   (C)   Front footage assessment.
      (1)   A front footage charge of $7 per lineal foot shall be paid to the
city at the time application is made for sewer service connection to an
existing sewer lateral for which no previous front footage assessment or fee
has been paid for the particular lot or parcel. Subdivision lots shall be
exempt from the front footage charge when service laterals have been installed,
by the subdivider, to serve properties within the development.
      (2)   Front footage assessments will be made and paid to the city based
upon the property frontage along the street or alley where the connection is
made.
   (D)   Extension of sewer lateral. Whenever the installation of a new sewer
line is required to serve an applicant for sewer service, the applicant's
obligation or cost for sewer service will be the established front footage
assessment, inspection and connection fees, and monthly service charge. The
applicant shall advance to the city 100% of the cost of extending sewer service
to his or her property and the cost of the line across the full width of
applicant's property. The city will reimburse to the applicant the difference
between the applicant's obligation or costs and the total cost of the sewer
lateral extension over a ten-year period in equal annual installments, with no
interest, commencing one-year following the city's acceptance of the completed
project, provided however, that in the event it appears for any reason
unfeasible to extend a sewer lateral under the terms of this section, the city
may refuse to extend the sewer lateral or it may agree to extend the sewer
lateral under a separate agreement containing terms, conditions and provisions
for payment which are mutually agreed upon by the city and the property owner
or owners requesting the extension.
   (E)   Charges for connection to sewer lines financed by state or federal
funds.
      (1)   In the event state or federal funds are used in construction of a
sewer line, the front footage assessment and connection fees will be reduced
50%, for single-family residential applicants who hook on to the sewer line
within a 12-month period following the completion of the project. Following the
12-month period, single-family residential applicants for sewer service
involving connections to state or federal funded sewer lines will be assessed
the regular front footage and connection fees.
      (2)   All applicants other than single-family residential applicants
shall not receive a reduced connection and front footage assessment rate.
   (F)   Monthly sewer service charges. The following monthly sewer service
charges are hereby established for properties served by the city.
      (1)   Base monthly rates for residential, commercial and all other users
shall be as follows:
 
             October 1, July 1, 2016 July 1, 2017 July 1, 2018 July 1, 2019
             2015
Base Monthly                                                
Rate         $25.79     $33.01       $40.28       $47.12       $49.48
 
      (2)   In addition to the base monthly rates, all non-residential users
will be charged a variable rate, based on gallon usage over 7,480 gallons. The
rate shall be assessed as follows:
 
Commercial Classification                                Class    Variable Rate
Group 1: Schools without cafeterias, offices             Low      $0.002512
Group 2: Commercial, hospitals, extended care
facilities, markets without delis, automobile servicers, Domestic $0.00335
laundromats
Group 3: Schools with cafeterias, restaurants, short     Medium   $0.004523
order facilities, markets with delis
Group 4: Restaurants with full kitchens                  High     $0.00737
 
      (3)   Multiple accounts on one meter. Where more than one residence or
business is served by a common meter, a composite sewer rate shall be
determined, based on the number and type of residences and businesses served by
the meter. The composite rate shall be computed as a weighted average of the
respective sewer rates for the individual residences and businesses based on
categories and rates established previously in this section. The composite rate
shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the city, using estimated flows
for the individual businesses and the respective sewer rates established for
specific categories.
         (a)   The weighted average is computed by estimating the amount of
flow by their individual rate (assuming they were on individual meters), and
summing the total cost and flow for the multiple account meters.
         (b)   Composite rates will vary from multiple accounts to multiple
accounts, depending on the mix of user types for the shared meter.
      (4)   All sewer service charges shall be billed on a bimonthly basis. The
bimonthly rates shall double the monthly rates during the time the bimonthly
billings are in effect.
      (5)   All sewer service charges are due and payable upon receipt and
shall be considered delinquent if not paid seven days after mailing or e-
mailing by the city. Any bills not paid within such period are considered
delinquent.
      (6)   Any sewer charges, which are not paid by close of business 34
calendar days after the bill is issued, shall have a service charge of 10% of
the billing assessed at the time of payment.
      (7)   Deposit. Applicants for utility services are required to establish
credit before receiving such service. Credit shall be deemed established if the
applicant meets one of the following options:
         (a)   Makes a cash deposit of $100 as a guarantee for the payment of
future bills.
         (b)   Has been a customer of city utility services for 12 consecutive
months within the last 18 months, and during such time has paid all bills
without any delinquency.
         (c)   1.   Provide the city with a letter of credit reference from
another utility company showing an on-time payment record for the period of at
least the 12 consecutive months directly prior to the date of the requested
service.
            2.   If a consumer fails to pay a bill for sewer services, the city
may apply the deposit insofar as necessary to liquidate the account and may
require that the deposit be restored to an amount twice the original deposit
amount. After a cash deposit to guarantee payment for sewer service has stood
unimpaired for 12 months, such deposit shall be applied to the depositor's
current account balance. Upon closing any account, the balance of any deposit
remaining, after the closing bill for service has been paid, shall be returned
promptly to the depositor.
      (8)   Sewer service charges set forth herein may be increased or
decreased by resolution of the City Council.
   (G)   Septic tank destruction permit. Any property owner seeking to abandon
his or her septic tank must first obtain a septic tank destruction permit from
the City of Riverbank Public Works Department. The fee for the permit shall be
$75.
   (H)   Annual fees for the food service establishment discharge permit.
      (1)   Permit fees will be calculated based on the following tasks:
 
FOG Permit review and approval 1.5 hours
Annual compliance visit        1.0 hours
Administration                 1.0 hours
Total annual permit fee        3.5 hours
 
      (2)   At the time the permit is issued, the final fee as determined by
the then current staff rate as determined by inflation will be paid annually
for the management, administration and inspection of the grease removal device
for the food service establishment discharge permit.
      (3)   This fee shall be updated as necessary using the Consumer Price
Index (CPI) to cover the cost of inflation for implementing the fats oils and
grease reduction program.
      (4)   Re-inspection fees necessary as a result of a violation of the
permit shall be in the amount set forth in division (A) above.
   (I)   Other fees associated with the installation of a grease interceptor as
required by the food service establishment discharge permit.
      (1)   Additional fees to cover the cost of engineering and inspection of
a new grease interceptor shall be calculated as follows:
 
Business license review  0.5 hours
Plan review              1.5 hours
Construction inspection  1.0 hours
Total annual permit fee: 3.0 hours
 
      (2)   At the time the permit is issued, the final fee as determined by
the then current staff rate as determined by inflation must be paid prior to
the issuance of a building permit.
(Ord. 97-09, passed 1-12-98; Am. Ord. 2000-06, passed 5-8-00; Am. Ord. 2001-06,
passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 2003-007, passed 6-9-03; Am. Ord. 2004-004, passed 6-
28-04; Am. Ord. 2004-007, passed 9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2005-004, passed 4-25-05;
Am. Ord. 2005-007, passed 5-9-05; Am. Ord. 2005-013, passed 7-11-05; Am. Ord.
2006-11, passed 7-10-06; Am. Ord. 2007-004, passed 7-9-07; Am. Ord. 2008-006,
passed 7-14-08; Am. Ord. 2009-004, passed 7-13-09; Am. Ord. 2009-010, passed
12-14-09; Am. Ord. 2015-014, passed 10-13-15; Am. Ord. 2022-005, passed 9-27-
22)
§ 51.04 HARMFUL SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to place any of the following substances in
any public sewer, sewer pipe, manhole or industrial waste pipeline of the city:
   (A)   Any fats, grease or similar substances, except where the same shall be
incidentally contained in domestic sewage from private houses.
   (B)   Sand, dirt, mud or other similar substances.
   (C)   Crude oil, petroleum, kerosene or any product of crude oil, petroleum
or any substances of which the same forms a constituent part.
(Ord. 239, passed 12-8-58)
   (D)   Any industrial wastes containing: a pH lower than 7.2, sulfides, whey,
or any substance which is deleterious to the public sewerage system or
industrial waste pipeline of the city.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 4-24-78)
   (E)   There shall be no new connections made to the city's sanitary or
industrial sewers of any pipe, catch basin, or appurtenance containing storm
waters, surface runoff, street wash or other waters from inflow sources not
classified as sanitary sewage or industrial waste waters.
   (F)   Any new sewer and/or sewer connection to the city's sanitary or
industrial sewer system shall be properly designed in accordance with the city
standards and shall be inspected to insure proper construction.
(Ord. 75-5, passed 7-14-75)
(`67 Code, § 4-4-5)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.05 VIOLATIONS.
   The Plumbing Inspector shall have the power to temporarily shut off any
premises from the use of the sewer system and/or the industrial waste pipeline
of the city if the occupant or user of such premises is placing in such sewer
system and/or industrial waste pipeline substances which are in violation of
this chapter. The Plumbing Inspector shall report the circumstances of such
shutoff to the City Council at its next meeting following the shutoff. Not less
than five days prior to the meeting, the occupant or user of such premises
shall be given written notice, personally or by first class mail addressed to
the premises, that the City Council will consider the report of the Plumbing
Inspector and what the occupant or user of such premises may appear and be
heard. At the meeting the City Council shall consider the report of the
Plumbing Inspector and shall afford the occupant or user of the premises an
opportunity to be heard. At the conclusion of the hearing the City Council may
order that service be restored to the premises with or without imposing
conditions thereon, or it may revoke the permit of the user or occupant of the
premises to use the city sewer and/or industrial waste system.
(`67 Code, § 4-4-7) (Ord. 78-4, passed 4-24-78)
§ 51.06 VIOLATOR TO REIMBURSE CITY'S COSTS.
   (A)   Any person who, after five days’ written notice to cease and desist,
continues to place, or allows or permits to be placed, any harmful substance,
as that term is defined in §
51.04 hereof, in any public sewer, sewer pipe, manhole or industrial waste
pipeline of the city, which requires expenditure of city funds by the city for
labor and/or materials to remove the same or to remedy problems created thereby
shall reimburse the city for the total cost of such labor and materials within
15 days after received a statement for such costs from the city.
   (B)   The food service establishment permit holder shall pay to the city the
following fines for the violation type and number of occurrences set forth in
the schedule below. The occurrence of each violation shall be determined as the
number of repeated violations within the permit term.
 
Minor Violation        1st Offense 2nd Offense 3rd Offense 4th Offense and Up
Failure to submit      $50         $100        $150        $300
records
Inspection hindrance   $50         $100        $150        $300
(equipment related)
Failure to maintain on $50         $100        $150        $300
site records
Failure to pump grease $150        $300        $450        $1,000
and submit records
 
 
                                                                            1st     2nd     3rd     4th
Intermediate Violation                                                      Offense Offense Offense Offense
                                                                                                    and Up
Failure to maintain necessary equipment (T’s, grease trap not watertight, $150    $300    $500    $1,000
baffles and the like)
 
 
Major Violation
Source of sewer blockage (minimum)          $500
Source of sewer blockage (maximum)          $25,000
Source of sanitary sewer overflow (minimum) $1,000
Source of sanitary sewer overflow (maximum) $25,000
Falsification of maintenance records        $1,000
 
(`67 Code, § 4-4-8) (Ord. 77-15, passed 8-22-77; Am. Ord. 2009-004, passed 7-
13-09)
§ 51.07 UNSANITARY DISCHARGES.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful to permit
any part of the contents of any privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, water
closet, urinal, pipe, sewer line, or any sewage, effluent, night soil, slop
water, or any other filthy water, matter, or substance, to flow or discharge
upon the ground or upon the surface of any lot or premises or in any public
street or other public place.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-6) (Ord. 47, passed 12-19-38)
§ 51.08 PRIVIES; WATER CLOSETS.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
person to establish, build, or maintain a privy or toilet other than a water
closet for the deposit of human wastes.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-7) (Ord. 99, passed 8-13-51)
§ 51.09 SERVICE LATERAL PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   A service lateral is a private facility. The property owner shall be
responsible for constructing, repairing, and maintaining the entire sewer
lateral between the building and the sanitary sewer main (including the lateral
and building sewers, and the tap, saddle, or wye connection fitting at the
sanitary sewer main). The city shall not be financially responsible for any
sewer lateral construction, operation, maintenance, repair, abandonment, or
other cost whatsoever, except where the city itself or its contractor
reconstructs or realigns the sanitary sewer main, thereby necessitating the
reconnection of sewer laterals to the sanitary sewer main.
(Ord. 2013-001, passed 4-22-13)
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER
§ 51.20 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment systems
referred to as Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) and enables the city to
protect its collection and treatment system and to comply with all state and
federal laws.
   (B)   The objectives of this subchapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introductions of pollutants into the wastewater
collection and treatment system which will interfere with the operation of the
system.
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
collection and treatment system which can pass through the system into
receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the
system.
      (3)   To protect both Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) personnel who
may be affected by wastewater in the course of their employment and the general
public.
      (4)   To enable the city to comply with its waste discharge requirements,
to comply with its sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal
or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject.
   (C)   This subchapter shall apply to all persons within the city and to
persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement users of the city
POTW. This subchapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits,
provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities, and requires
user reporting.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
§ 51.21 ADMINISTRATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director of Public Works shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Director of Public Works may be
delegated by the Director of Public Works to other city personnel.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
§ 51.22 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this subchapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
   BOD      Biochemical Oxygen Demand
   CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
   COD      Chemical Oxygen Demand
   EPA      U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
   gpd      gallons per day
   mg/L      milligrams per liter
   POTW      Publicly Owned Treatment Works
   RWQCB   Regional Water Quality Control Board
   TSS      Total Suspended Solids
   USC      United States Code
   WDR      Waste Discharge Requirements
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
§ 51.23 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The State of California's Regional Water Quality Control
Board - Central Valley Region.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.
      (1)   If the user is a corporation:
         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars),
if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      (3)   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3), above, may
designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to the city.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five days at 20° C., usually expressed as a concentration (for example, mg/
L).
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to
the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15
minutes.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the
POTW from any nondomestic source.
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT. The maximum concentration
of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the
analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's waste discharge
requirements.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the State of
California in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the city's waste discharge requirements, including an increase
in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
   PERMITTEE. The person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant hereto.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (for example, pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to, or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge standards,
pretreatment standards, and local limits.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS  or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in
§ 51.24 of this subchapter.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A treatment works, as defined by
Section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by the city. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, and disposal of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and
any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
   SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, etc.).
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   A user that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler
blowdown wastewater);
         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
         (c)   Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (2)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in division (1) has
no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time,
on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user,
determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial
user.
   SLUDGE LOAD or SLUDGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in
§ 51.24 of this subchapter.
   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation
of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by
this subchapter, or a duly authorized representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of;
or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable
by laboratory filtering.
   USER or INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge.
   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW
which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial
waste.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
§ 51.24 GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW.
   (B)   Specific prohibitions.
      (1)   No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the
following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
         (a)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
         (b)   Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or higher than 11.0, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
         (c)   Any liquid or water having a temperature higher than 104°F.
         (d)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes.
         (e)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids sufficient
to create a public nuisance or hazard.
         (f)   Any water or waste containing suspended solids, viscous
substances or soluble solids of such character and quality that unusual
attention or expense is required to prevent obstruction of flow in the POTW or
to handle such materials in the POTW.
         (g)   Any pollutants or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous
substance in sufficient quantity resulting in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes to interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard or create a hazard, such as acute worker health and safety problems.
         (h)   Any substance which will cause damage or imbalance of any
portion of the treatment sludge disposal process.
         (i)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate any state
receiving water quality standards.
         (j)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
         (k)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
         (l)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
         (m)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
         (n)   Storm water, groundwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage
or yard drainage shall not be discharged directly or indirectly to the city's
POTW. The city may approve the temporary discharge of such water only when no
alternate method of disposal is reasonably available.
      (2)   If a temporary permit is granted for the discharge of such water
into a tributary sewer, the user shall pay the applicable charges for use and
fees, and shall meet such other conditions as required by the city.
   (C)   Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in
any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The
Director of Public Works may impose mass limitations on users who are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other
cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
§ 51.25 PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this subchapter and shall achieve compliance with
prohibitions set out in
§ 51.24 of this subchapter within the time limitations specified by the
Director of Public Works. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Director of Public Works for review, and shall be acceptable to the Director of
Public Works before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans
and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge
acceptable to the city under the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.
      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Director of Public Works may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial
waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter.
      (2)   The Director of Public Works may require any person discharging
into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense,
a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
      (3)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the Director of
Public Works and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.
      (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
   (C)   Accidental discharge/sludge control plans. At least once every two
years, the Director of Public Works shall evaluate whether each significant
industrial user needs an accidental discharge/sludge control plan. The Director
of Public Works may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and
implement such a plan. Alternatively, the Director of Public Works may develop
such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/sludge control plan shall
address, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Director of Public Works
and POTW Supervisor of any accidental or sludge discharge, as required by
§ 51.28 of this subchapter; and
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or sludge
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
§ 51.26 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Wastewater analysis. When requested by the Director of Public Works, a
significant industrial user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater within 60 days of the request. The Director
of Public Works is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require significant industrial users to update this information.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
         (1)   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into
the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the
Director of Public Works, except that a significant industrial user that has
filed a timely application pursuant to division (C) below of this section may
continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.
      (2)   The Director of Public Works may require other users to obtain
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this
subchapter.
      (3)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in
§ 51.32 of this subchapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
federal, state, and local law.
   (C)   Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections. Any user
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater
into the POTW prior to the effective date of this subchapter and who wishes to
continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 30 days after said date,
apply to the Director of Public Works for a wastewater discharge permit in
accordance with division (E) below of this section, and shall not cause or
allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 60 days of the effective date of
this subchapter except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued
by the Director of Public Works.
   (D)   Wastewater discharge permitting: new connection. Any significant
industrial user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes
to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior
to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this
wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with division (E) below of this
section must be filed at least 60 days prior to the date upon which any
discharge will begin or recommence.
   (E)   Wastewater discharge permit application contents.
      (1)   All significant industrial users required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit must submit a permit application. The Director of Public Works
may require all users to submit as part of an application the following
information:
         (a)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on
the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or
stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be,
discharged to the POTW;
         (b)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed
or actual hours of operation;
         (c)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and
rate of production;
         (d)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day);
         (e)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location,
and elevation, and all points of discharge;
         (f)   Time and duration of discharges; and
         (g)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Director
of Public Works to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
      (2)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and
will be returned to the user for revision.
   (F)   Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge
permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:
   “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
   (G)   Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The Director of Public Works
will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge
permit application, the Director of Public Works will determine whether or not
to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The Director of Public Works may deny
any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
§ 51.27 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit
shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the
effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than five years, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works.
Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it
will expire.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit
shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the
Director of Public Works to prevent pass through or interference, protect the
quality of the groundwater receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect
worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and
protect against damage to the POTW.
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
         (a)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five years,
         (b)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with
division (E) of this section, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or
operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
         (c)   Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; and,
         (d)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample
type based on federal, state, and local law.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited
to, the following conditions:
         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
         (b)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
         (c)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine
discharges;
         (d)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
         (e)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
         (f)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
         (g)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director of Public
Works to ensure compliance with this subchapter, and state and federal laws,
rules, and regulations.
   (C)   Wastewater discharge permit appeals. The Director of Public Works
shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit.
Any person, including the user, may petition the Director of Public Works to
reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice
of its issuance.
      (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to
be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
      (2)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
      (3)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
      (4)   If the Director of Public Works fails to act within 30 days, a
request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered
final administrative actions.
   (D)   Wastewater discharge permit modification. The Director of Public Works
may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not
limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
      (3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the city's POTW, the city personnel, or the receiving waters;
      (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
      (6)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      (7)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit.
   (E)   Nontransferability of wastewater discharge permit. Wastewater
discharge permits shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new
owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed condition.
   (F)   Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
      (1)   The Director of Public Works may revoke a wastewater discharge
permit for good cause, including but not limited to the following reasons:
         (a)   Failure to notify the Director of Public Works of significant
changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
         (b)   Failure to provide prior notification to the Director of Public
Works of changed conditions pursuant to
§ 51.28(B);
         (c)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
         (d)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
         (e)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
         (f)   Refusing to allow the Director of Public Works or designated
representative timely access to the facility premises and records;
         (g)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
         (h)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
         (i)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
         (j)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
         (k)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
         (l)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this subchapter.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits
issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit to that user.
   (G)   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring
wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit
reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with
§ 51.26(E) of this subchapter, a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of
the user's existing wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
§ 51.28 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Periodic compliance reports.
      (1)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined
by the Director of Public Works but in no case less than twice per year (in
June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
§ 51.26 of this subchapter.
      (2)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
      (3)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Director of Public
Works, using the procedures prescribed in division (G) of this section, the
results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
   (B)   Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the Director of
Public Works of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or
system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at
least 90 days before the change.
      (1)   The Director of Public Works may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
§ 51.26(F) of this subchapter.
      (2)   The Director of Public Works may issue a wastewater discharge
permit under
§ 51.26(G) of this subchapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under
§ 51.27(D) of this subchapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
      (3)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but
are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants.
   (C)   Reports of potential problems.
      (1)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a sludge load, that may cause potential
problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the
Director of Public Works and POTW Superintendent of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
      (2)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the Director of Public Works, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve
the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred
as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to
person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines,
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this subchapter.
      (3)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in division (1), above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   (D)   Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the Director
of Public Works as the Director of Public Works may require.
   (E)   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the Director of
Public Works within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall
also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat
analysis to the Director of Public Works within 30 days after becoming aware of
the violation. The user is not required to resample if the Director of Public
Works monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the Director
of Public Works samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user
receives the results of this sampling.
   (F)   Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must
be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.
   (G)   Sample collection.
      (1)   Except as indicated in division (2), below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In
the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the Director of Public
Works may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four
grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab
samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
      (2)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   (H)   Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
   (I)   Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this
subchapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required
by this subchapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant
to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user
or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
§ 51.29 COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
   (A)   Right of entry: inspection and sampling. The Director of Public Works
or his/her designated representative shall have the right to enter the premises
of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of
this subchapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder.
Users shall allow the Director of Public Works or his/her designated
representative ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of
any additional duties.
      (1)   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the Director of Public Works or his/her designated
representative will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of
performing specific responsibilities.
      (2)   The Director of Public Works or his/her designated representative
shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation
of; such devices as are necessary to conduct wastewater sampling and metering
(flow measurement) of the user's operations.
      (3)   The Director of Public Works or his/her designated representative
may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times
in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All
devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated monthly
to ensure their accuracy. The monitoring facilities design shall be approved by
the Director of Public Works prior to installation.
      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or verbal request of the Director of Public Works or his/
her designated representative and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be born by the user.
      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director of Public Works or
his/her designated representative access to the user's premises shall be a
violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   Search warrants. If the Director of Public Works or his/her designated
representative has been refused access to a building, structure, or property,
or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this subchapter or that there is a need to inspect
and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city
designed to verity compliance with this subchapter or any permit or order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare
of the community, then the Director of Public Works may seek issuance of a
search warrant from the appropriate court.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
§ 51.30 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring
programs, and from Director of Public Works or his/her designated
representative inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the
public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works or his/her
designated representative, that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at
the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and
demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be
held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets
or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public,
but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies
for uses related to the pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other “effluent data” as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not
be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public
without restriction.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
§ 51.31 PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall publish annually, in the largest
daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list
of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (B)   The term SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE shall mean:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant
parameter by any amount;
      (2)   Any other discharge violation that the Director of Public Works
believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;
      (3)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in Director of Public
Works or his/her designated representative exercise of its emergency authority
to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      (4)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
      (5)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports as required in
§ 51.28 of this subchapter;
      (6)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      (7)   Any other violation(s) which the Director of Public Works
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
§ 51.32 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Notification of violation. When the Director of Public Works finds
that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
subchapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director of Public Works may
serve upon that user a written notice of violation (NOV). Within 30 days of the
receipt of this NOV, or such shorter period as may be prescribed in the NOV, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by
the user to the Director of Public Works. Submission of this plan in no way
relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the Director of Public Works to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
notice of violation.
   (B)   Consent orders. The Director of Public Works may enter into consent
orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such
documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents
shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued
pursuant to divisions (D) and (E) of this section and shall be judicially
enforceable.
   (C)   Show cause hearing. The Director of Public Works may order a user
which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter,
a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Director of Public
Works and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the
meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a
request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered
or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 15 days prior to the
hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the
user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
   (D)   Compliance orders. When the Director of Public Works finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director of Public Works may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come
into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into
compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are
installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other
requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring
and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a
compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (E)   Cease and desist orders.
      (1)   When the Director of Public Works finds that a user has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
Director of Public Works may issue an order to the user directing it to cease
and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
         (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
      (2)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (F)   Emergency suspensions/harmful contributions.
      (1)   The Director of Public Works may immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to
present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Director of Public Works may also immediately suspend a
user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
      (a)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Director of Public Works may take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to
the POTW, its rapid infiltration beds, its underlying groundwater, or
endangerment to any individuals. The Director of Public Works may allow the
user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that the period of endangerment
has passed, and payment of any costs incurred by the City to previously suspend
the user's wastewater service, unless the termination proceedings in division
(G) of this section are initiated against the user.
         (b)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Director of Public Works prior
to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under divisions (C) or (G)
of this section.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
   (G)   Termination of discharge.
      (1)   In addition to the provisions in
§ 51.27(F) of this subchapter, any user who violates the following conditions
is subject to discharge termination:
         (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
      (2)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under division (C) of
this section why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this
option by the Director of Public Works shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
§ 51.33 ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES.
   Rates, as established from time to time by the City Council by ordinance,
shall be due and payable as established by ordinance of the City Council.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
Cross-reference:
   Rates and charges specified, see §
51.03
FATS, OILS AND GREASES (FOG)
§ 51.40 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from
contributions and accumulation of fats, oils and greases into the sanitary
sewer system from industrial or commercial establishments, particularly food
preparation and serving facilities.
(Ord. 2009-003, passed 7-13-09)
§ 51.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE PRETREATMENT TECHNOLOGY.  Includes, but is not limited to,
devices that are used to trap, separate and hold grease from wastewater and
prevent it from being discharged into the sanitary sewer collection system.
   FATS, OILS AND GREASES (FOG). Organic polar compounds derived from animal
and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules.
These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures
established in the United States Code of Federal Regulations 40 C.F.R. 136, as
may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as
GREASE or GREASES.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS (FSE). Those establishments primarily engaged in
activities of preparing, serving or otherwise making available for consumption
by the public such as restaurant, commercial kitchen, caterer, hotel, school,
hospital, prison, correctional facility and care institution. These
establishments use one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking
by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie
cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting or
poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing and any other
food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or
on a receptacle that requires washing.
   GREASE CONTROL DEVICE. A grease control device for the purpose of this
subchapter includes grease traps, grease interceptors and alternative
pretreatment technology.
   GREASE INTERCEPTOR. A structure or device designed for the purpose of
removing and preventing fats, oils and grease from entering the sanitary sewer
collection system. These devices are often below-ground units in outside areas
and are built as multi-chamber baffled tanks.
   GREASE TRAP. A device for separating and retaining waterborne greases and
grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the
sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Such traps are typically
compact under-the-sink units that are near food preparation areas.
   MINIMUM DESIGN CAPABILITY. The design features of a grease interceptor and
its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases from
grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public sanitary sewer. Minimum
design standards shall be per current California Plumbing Code and as specified
in city standards.
   RENDERABLE FOG. Uncontaminated fats, oils and grease from the food
preparation process that can be used as a source of material that is free of
impurities and can be recycled into products such as animal feed and cosmetics.
   USER. Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits
of the city who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge of
wastewater into sewers within the city’s boundaries, including persons who
contribute such wastewater from mobile sources, such as those who discharge
hauled wastewater.
(Ord. 2009-003, passed 7-13-09)
§ 51.42 ADMINISTRATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director of Public Works shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Director of Public Works may be delegated
by the Director of Public Works to other city personnel.
   (A)   Food service establishment permit requirement. All establishments
discharging wastewater to the city sanitary sewer collection system are subject
to the permit requirements of §
51.26 and following.
      (1)   Grease interceptor requirements. All permitted food service
establishments including restaurants, cafeterias, diners and similar non-
industrial facilities using food preparation processes that generate FOG are
required to install, operate and maintain an approved type and adequately sized
grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this
subchapter.
      (2)   Implementation.
         (a)   New establishment. All new food service establishment facilities
are subject to grease interceptor requirements. All such facilities must obtain
prior approval from the Director of Public Works for grease interceptor sizing
prior to submitting plans for a building permit. All grease interceptors shall
be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
         (b)   Existing facilities. Existing facilities with planned
modification under a building permit with valuations set forth in the FSE
Policy will be required to include plans to comply with the grease interceptor
requirements. These facilities must obtain approval from the Director of Public
Works for grease interceptor sizing prior to submitting plans for a building
permit.
            1.   All existing food service establishments, determined by the
Director of Public Works, to have a reasonable potential to adversely impact
the city’s sewer system will be notified of their obligation to install a
grease interceptor within the specified period set forth in the notification
letter.
            2.   Existing food service establishments which generate, and
discharge wastewater containing FOG, and which have an existing non-complying
FOG pretreatment system may, as determined by the city, operate the existing
FOG pretreatment system. Such facilities shall submit an application for a
permit and include applicable information to amend the existing permit or
submit an application for a new permit if no permit exists.
      (3)   Variance from grease interceptor requirements. Grease interceptors
required under this subchapter shall be installed unless the Director of Public
Works authorizes the installation of an indoor grease trap or other alternative
pretreatment technology and determines that the installation of a grease
interceptor would not be feasible.
      (4)   Costs. All costs and related expenses associated with the
installation and connection of the FOG Interceptor(s) or Alternate Pretreatment
System(s) shall be borne by the food service establishment. The food service
establishment shall indemnify the city and its agents for any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly occur due to the installation of the FOG
pretreatment system.
   (B)   Conditional waivers. Existing FSEs that do not meet the requirements
set forth in division (A)(2) above may apply for a conditional waiver. The
conditional waiver will specify requirements that the FSE must comply with to
operate without an interceptor. The Director of Public Works or designee will
continually review FSE compliance with the conditional waiver requirements. A
conditional waiver may be revoked at any time for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Quantity of FOG discharge as measured or as indicated by the size
of FSEs based on seating capacity, number of meals served, menu, water usage,
amount of on-site consumption of prepared food and other conditions have
changed since the granting of the waiver such that the FSE is contributing to
FOG discharges;
      (2)   Identification of the FSE as a significant contributor of FOG into
the Sewer System, which is based on inspection or sampling of the FOG
discharged from the FSE’s sewer lateral to the sewer system;
      (3)   Adequacy of implementation and compliance with Kitchen Best
Managements Practices (BMPs);
      (4)   Change in sewer size, grade and condition based on visual
information;
      (5)   Changes in operations that significantly affect FOG discharge;
      (6)   Failure to comply with any of the conditions set forth in the
waiver; and
      (7)   Any other condition deemed reasonably related to the generation of
FOG discharges by the Director of Public Works.
   (C)   Exemptions. Exemption from the FSE discharge permit: An exemption may
be granted to limited food preparation establishment. A limited food
preparation establishment engages only in reheating, hot holding or assembly of
ready to eat food products and as a result, no wastewater discharge containing
a significant amount of fats, oils and grease. A limited food preparation
establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor or
consistency of food.
   (D)   Pretreatment requirements.
      (1)   Grease interceptor requirements.
         (a)   Grease interceptors shall be installed at a location where it
shall be easily accessible for inspection, cleaning and removal of intercepted
grease. The grease interceptor may not be installed in any part of the building
where food is handled. Location of the grease interceptor must meet the
approval of the Director of Public Works.
         (b)   All such grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of
accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain Minimum Design
Capability or effective volume. These devices should be inspected annually at
minimum. Users who are required to maintain a grease interceptor shall:
            1.   Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time to facilitate
the separation of oils and grease to the extent that oil and grease
concentrations in wastewaters discharged to the sewage system owned, operated
and maintained by the city, do not exceed established discharge limitations set
by the city as defined in §
51.44;
            2.   Remove any accumulated grease caps and sludge pockets as
required. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials
which could settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the effective volume of
the device; and
            3.   Be serviced (pumped, cleaned and inspected) by a city
permitted liquid waste hauler, at a minimum frequency to ensure proper
function. Records of grease interceptors shall be in accordance to division (E)
below.
         (c)   Except as provided herein, for a period of one year following
adoption of this subchapter, although installation of grease interceptors will
be required to be installed, no enforcement actions will be taken under this
subchapter for failure to achieve limits on grease discharges from grease
interceptors. However; if, during this one year period an obstruction of a
sewer main(s) occurs that causes a sewer overflow to the extent that an impact
on the environment is realized and that the overflow or failure of the sanitary
sewer collection system to convey sewage can be attributed in part or in whole
to an accumulation of grease in the sewer main(s), the city will take
appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in
Chapter 51, against the generator or contributor of such grease.
      (2)   Grease trap requirements.
         (a)   Upon approval by the Director of Public Works, a grease trap
complying with the provisions of this section must be installed in the waste
line leading from sinks, drains and other fixtures or equipment in food service
establishments where grease may be introduced into the drainage or sewage
system in quantities that can effect line stoppage or hinder sewage treatment
or private sewage disposal.
         (b)   Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating
conditions by periodic removal of the accumulated grease. No such collected
grease shall be introduced into any drainage piping, or public or private
sewer.
         (c)   Except as provided herein, for a period of one year following
adoption of this subchapter, although installation of grease traps will be
required to be installed, no enforcement actions will be taken under this
subchapter for failure to achieve limits on grease discharges from the
facility. However; if, during this one year period an obstruction of a sewer
main(s) occurs that causes a sewer overflow to the extent that an impact on the
environment is realized and that the overflow or failure of the sanitary sewer
collection system to convey sewage can be attributed in part or in whole to an
accumulation of grease in the sewer main(s), the city will take appropriate
enforcement actions, as stipulated in the Industrial Pretreatment Enforcement
Plan and Sewer Use Ordinance, against the generator or contributor of such
grease.
   (E)   Compliance monitoring.
      (1)   City personnel may inspect the facilities of any establishment
required to have a grease interceptor or similar device, to determine whether
the requirements set fourth in this subchapter are being met. Compliance
monitoring shall be conducted pursuant to §
51.29 and as follows:
         (a)   City personnel will inspect or order the inspection and sample
the wastewater discharges of any food service establishment annually; and
         (b)   Failure of the inspection and cause for re-inspection shall be
at the expense of the user subject to the inspection fee outlined in §
51.03(H).
      (2)   The establishments shall be required to keep all manifests,
receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, inspection, grease removal
of/from the grease control device, disposal carrier and disposal site location
for no less than three years. The establishment shall, upon request, make the
manifests, receipts, invoices and any other applicable documentation available
to the Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
   (F)   Requirements to self-monitor.
      (1)   The city may require establishments to construct and maintain in
proper operating condition at the establishment’s sole expense, flow
monitoring, constituent monitoring and/or sampling facilities.
      (2)   Those establishments discharging under a conditional waiver may be
required by the Director of Public Works to install sampling facilities for
compliance monitoring.
      (3)   The location of the monitoring or metering facilities shall be
subject to approval by the Director of Public Works.
      (4)   Establishments may also be required by the Director of Public Works
to submit waste analysis plans, contingency plans and meet other necessary
requirements to ensure proper operation and maintenance of the grease control
device.
      (5)   Establishments shall not increase the use of water or in any other
manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
treatment to achieve compliance.
(Ord. 2009-003, passed 7-13-09)
§ 51.43 REGULATION.
   (A)   Prohibition.
      (1)   Introduction of any additives into any establishment’s wastewater
system for the purpose of emulsifying FOG is prohibited.
      (2)   Disposal of waste cooking oil into drainage pipes is prohibited.
All waste cooking oils shall be collected and stored properly in receptacles
such as barrels or drums for recycling or other acceptable methods of disposal.
      (3)   Discharge of wastewater from dishwashers to any grease trap or
grease interceptor is prohibited.
      (4)   Discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of 110°F to any
grease control device, is prohibited.
      (5)   The use of biological additives for grease remediation or as a
supplement to interceptor maintenance is prohibited, unless written approval
for the Director of Public Works is obtained.
      (6)   Discharge of wastes from toilets, urinals, wash basins and other
fixtures containing fecal materials to sewer lines intended for grease
interceptor service, or vice versa, is prohibited.
      (7)   Discharge into the sewer system of any waste which has FOG as well
as solid materials removed from the grease control device is prohibited. Grease
removed from grease interceptors shall be waste hauled periodically as part of
the operation and maintenance requirements for grease interceptors. Licensed
waste haulers or an approved recycling facility must be used to dispose of FOG,
including waste cooking oil.
      (8)   Installation of food grinders are prohibited unless specifically
allowed in writing by the Director of Public Works.
      (9)   No food waste disposal unit or dishwasher shall be connected to or
discharged into any grease trap.
   (B)   Consent. Consent by the operator of the FSE for the city and other
regulatory agencies to inspect the FSE to confirm compliance with these
requirements, the Sewer WDRs and other applicable laws, rules and regulations,
including any NPDES permit applicable to the city.
   (C)   Additional requirements. Additional requirements as otherwise
determined to be reasonably appropriate by the Director of Public Works to
protect the city’s system or as specified by other regulatory agencies.
   (D)   Other terms and conditions.  Other terms and conditions, which may be
reasonably applicable to ensure compliance with these requirements as
determined by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 2009-003, passed 7-13-09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.44 WATERWATER DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS.
   No user shall allow wastewater discharge concentration from subject grease
interceptor, grease trap or alternative pretreatment technology to exceed 300
milligrams per liter, as defined by method EPA test method 1664.
(Ord. 2009-003, passed 7-13-09)
§ 51.45 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement shall be conducted as specified in §
51.32.
(Ord. 2009-003, passed 7-13-09)
§ 51.46 FOG REDUCTION PRACTICES.
   (A)   All establishments shall implement Best Management Practices in
accordance with the requirements and guidelines established by the city in an
effort to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system.
   (B)   Renderable fats, oils and grease shall not be disposed of in any sewer
or FOG Interceptor. All renderable fats, oils and grease shall be stored in a
separate, covered, leak-proof, Renderable FOG Container, stored out of reach of
vermin and collected by a renderer.
(Ord. 2009-003, passed 7-13-09)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   City to own and operate water system
   
52.03   Installation at owner's expense
   
52.04   Application for service
   
52.05   When city will or will not furnish water
   
52.06   Equipment property of city; maintenance of lines
   
52.07   Easements on private property
   
52.08   Unauthorized turn-on
   
52.09   Damage to system
   
52.10   Tampering with fire hydrants
   
52.11   Multiple users
   
52.12   Maintenance of fixtures and boilers; new plumbing
   
52.13   Standby fire protection service
   
52.14   Wells
   
52.15   New subdivisions
   
52.16   Falsifying information
   
52.17   Pre-metered water usage
Water Use Regulations
   
52.30   Responsibility of users
   
52.31   Use of water by other than supplied person
   
52.32   Irrigating
   
52.33   Prohibited acts
   
52.34   Restricted water use
   
52.35   Backflow and cross-connection control
Meters
   
52.45   Use of meters required
   
52.46   Installation of meters
   
52.47   Damaging or interfering with meters
   
52.48   Meter failures; testing
   
52.49   Change of meter location or meter size
Rates and Charges
   
52.60   Water Fund
   
52.61   Fees and charges established by ordinance
   
52.62   When charges due
   
52.63   Water charges as a lien
   
52.64   Payment of bills
   
52.65   Deposits
   
52.66   Disconnection for late payment
Administration
   
52.75   Management of system
   
52.76   Access to be provided to city
   
52.77   Right of entry
   
52.78   Right to shut off water mains
   
52.79   Termination of service
   
52.80   Correction of violation
   
52.81   Violation an infraction
Cross-reference:
   Systems Development Fees, see § 150.30 through 150.36
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   APPLICANT. An individual or agency applying for utility service.
   COMMERCIAL SERVICE. Provision of water to premises where the customer is
engaged in trade.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. When used herein, all applicable sections of the City Code
shall apply.
   CUSTOMER, CONSUMER. An individual or agency of record receiving utility
service from the utility.
   DEVELOPER. A person or corporation requesting water service from the city
regardless of the number of services.
   DEVELOPMENT. The improving of developed and/or undeveloped land to more
fully use the available land and/or structures. A development may be a
subdivision.
   DOMESTIC SERVICE. Provisions of water for household residential purposes,
including water for sprinkling lawns, gardens and shrubbery, watering
livestock, washing vehicles and other similar and customary purposes.
   DROUGHT. A drought or water shortage as defined in the Urban Water
Management Plan or as otherwise designated by federal, state, or local
government.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person designated by the City Manager or the Director of
Public Works to perform work and labor for the utility department, excluding
contractors and their employees.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The City Manager, Department Director, Public Safety
Officer, or any designated city personnel or other designated person that the
City Manager or City Council has authorized and charged with the responsibility
for the enforcement of any provision of this chapter.
   FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE. Provision of water to premises for automatic fire
protection.
   FLAT RATE. A fixed periodic charge for an unmetered service.
   FLAT RATE SERVICE. Provision of water in unmeasured quantities.
   IDLER. That piece of pipe used to conduct water in place of a meter in flat
rate service.
   INDUSTRIAL SERVICE. Provision of water to a customer for use in
manufacturing, processing activities, or other uses as described in the Zoning
Ordinance.
   IRRIGATION SERVICE. Provision of water for commercial, agricultural,
floricultural or horticultural use.
   MAINS. Distribution pipelines located in streets, highways, public ways, or
public utility easements which are used to serve the general public.
   METER. The device used to measure water consumption, such as, water meter.
   METER RATE SERVICE. Provision of water in measured quantities.
   MUNICIPAL or PUBLIC USE. Provision of water to a municipality or other
public body.
   PRE-METERED WATER USAGE. Use of city water prior to city water meters being
installed by the property owner.
   RENTABLE UNIT. A rentable unit is any building or portion thereof that can
be used as a completely independent unit.
   SERVICE CONNECTIONS. The pipe, valves, and other facilities by which means
the utility conducts water from its distribution mains to and through the
meter; or, to the curb-stop or shut-off valve on an unmetered service
connection.
   SENIOR CITIZEN. All persons who have reached the age of 65 years and classed
as “head of household” and who earn not over $7,000 annually.
   SUBDIVIDER. A person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who
proposes to divide, divides, or causes to be divided real property into a
subdivision for himself or for others, except that employees and consultants of
such persons or entities acting in such capacity are not “subdividers”.
   SUBDIVISION. The division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of
improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest
equalized county assessment roll as a parcel or as contiguous parcels.
   TEMPORARY SERVICE. A service for circuses, bazaars, fairs, construction
work, irrigation of vacant property, and similar uses, that because of their
nature will not be used steadily or permanently.
   UTILITY. The public utility or publicly owned utility named herein.
   UTILITY SERVICE. Includes water and/or sewer and/or refuse service.
   WATER WASTING. The use of water in such a manner that excess water is used
and not effectively utilized for the lawfully intended purpose. Water wasting
includes, but is not limited to the following:
      (1)   Watering lawns or gardens such that excess water leaves property or
area being watered.
      (2)   Washing vehicles, equipment or boats in driveways or streets using
open hose.
      (3)   Having leaky faucets or plumbing fixtures on premises.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-1) (Am. Ord. 2000-09, passed 12-11-00; Am. Ord. 2016-004,
passed 3-8-16)
§ 52.02 CITY TO OWN AND OPERATE WATER SYSTEM.
   The city shall own and operate a water system serving designated areas
within and without the corporate limits of the city and may purchase existing
systems or construct new works as may be necessary to supply to the people
within the areas an adequate and safe domestic water supply. The City Council
shall designate the area within and without the corporate limits of the city
which shall receive water service from the city water system. The city shall
endeavor to supply safe, potable, continuous and sufficient water at proper
pressure to all consumers at all times.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-2)
§ 52.03 INSTALLATION AT OWNER'S EXPENSE.
   All on-site and off-site water lines, connections, valves, plumbing and
accessory water facilities shall be constructed and installed at the owner's
expense, and shall be to city standards and approved by the city prior to water
service turn-on.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-6)
§ 52.04 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   All applications for water service shall be made on the forms
furnished by the city. Every customer obtaining water service shall sign an
application. In addition to any other information required, such application
shall show a true and accurate description of the area served, purpose for
which water shall be used, and the applicant's interest in the property served.
   (B)   Owners of property will be held responsible for water used on their
premises, although payments will be accepted from tenants. In case tenants do
not pay, the service may be disconnected and shall not be restored until the
delinquent water charges, including the cost of water delivered as well as the
cost of reconnection services, have been paid.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-7)
§ 52.05 WHEN CITY WILL OR WILL NOT FURNISH WATER.
   (A)   When laterals are in place or within a reasonable distance from a
particular parcel, the city will furnish water service from such line to the
back of the curbline if the pipeline is located in the street or to the back of
the sidewalk if a sidewalk is in place (except when there is a parkway between
the curb and sidewalk) or to the property line if the pipeline is located in an
easement, or alley.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-8)
   (B)   Water will not be furnished where there are defective or leaking
faucets, closets, or other fixtures, or where there are water closets or
urinals without self-closing valves, or tanks without self-acting float valves,
and when such may be discovered the supply may be shut off.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-9)
§ 52.06 EQUIPMENT PROPERTY OF CITY; MAINTENANCE OF LINES.
   (A)   All pipelines and appurtenant facilities constructed in or under city
streets, easements, or alleys shall become the property of the city upon
completion of the installation, and upon final inspection and acceptance of the
lines by the Director of Public Works.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-16)
   (B)   The city will maintain all mains, laterals, and appurtenances within
the city right-of-way, on city property or easements. It shall be the
responsibility of all water users to maintain the water service line from, but
not including the water meter, to the outlets of the line, inclusive of city
easements.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-18)
§ 52.07 EASEMENTS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   When a line is to be constructed across private property to serve one or
more parcels of land, a utility easement shall be granted to the city and the
easement line, size and installation approved by the Director of Public Works.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-17)
§ 52.08 UNAUTHORIZED TURN-ON.
   No person or water user shall turn on or reconnect a water meter or water
connection that has been turned off or disconnected by the city.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-20)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.09 DAMAGE TO SYSTEM.
   Any person, including a public utility, who damages any city water line or
fire hydrant, shall immediately report the location and extent of damage to the
city. The city shall thereupon repair the damage and charge the cost of such
repair to the person or utility who caused the damage.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-22)
§ 52.10 TAMPERING WITH FIRE HYDRANTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate, alter, change, remove, disconnect,
connect with, or interfere in any manner with any fire hydrant owned or used by
the city without first obtaining written permission from the Chief of the Fire
Department or his designated officer in charge.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-29)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.11 MULTIPLE USERS.
   If more than one consumer is served from one service connection, the owner
of the property or his agent shall be required to sign for and guarantee
payment for water service thereat, and the owner shall be liable for all water
served through such connection.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-23)
§ 52.12 MAINTENANCE OF FIXTURES AND BOILERS; NEW PLUMBING.
   (A)   The city shall not be liable for any damage to the property of the
consumer or others caused by broken, damaged, or leaky fixtures upon the
premises of the consumer. The city may charge for all water supplied the
consumer through a meter, even though the water is wasted because of broken,
damaged, leaky or open fixtures. The city shall in no case be liable for
damages occasioned by water running from open fixtures in or on premises to
which it has turned on the water. All consumers having an arrangement for hot
water shall have a tank from which to feed the boiler. The city shall not be
responsible for the safety of boilers on the premises of any consumer.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-24)
   (B)   When old plumbing is being repaired or remodeled, or new plumbing is
being installed, the owner shall install a stopcock or valve on the pipe
between the property line and the first fixture on his premises. Unless such
stopcock or valve is installed, the city shall not be required to turn on the
water or to install a service connection.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-25)
   (C)   No plumber or other person will be allowed to make any alteration to
any conduit, pipe, or other fixture connecting with the city mains, or to
connect pipes when they have been disconnected, or to turn water off or on at
the premises without the permission from the city.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-26)
§ 52.13 STANDBY FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE.
   Whenever fire protection water service on a standby basis is furnished to a
customer, a charge of $2 per month per each inch of standby service shall be
made and billed bi-monthly while such service is being furnished. Check valves
are required and shall be tested and certified for correct operation annually
at owner's expense.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-32)
§ 52.14 WELLS.
   (A)   No person may drill, dig, install or operate a water well within the
city for any purpose without the consent of the City Council.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-34) (Ord. 83-1, passed 3-28-83)
   (B)   No person owning or operating an existing well within the city may
furnish water for sale or gift.
   (C)   If a request is received to connect the city water system from an
owner having a well on his property, that well shall be properly abandoned in
accordance with city standards, or an approved backflow prevention device shall
be installed before the connection can be made.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-35) (Ord. 83-1, passed 3-28-83)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.15 NEW SUBDIVISIONS.
   Any new subdivision or development which will receive water service from the
city water system shall, at the subdivider's expense, install and construct the
necessary main lines, laterals, meter boxes, service connections, and fire
hydrants in accordance with city specifications. The subdivider or developer
shall convey ownership thereof to the city and pay to the city connection fees
for each lot or parcel to be served in the subdivision or development. The
mains shall extend to the farthest limits of the subdivision or development as
approved by the City Engineer. Water mains shall be looped unless otherwise
approved by the City Engineer.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-37) (Ord. 83-1, passed 3-28-83)
§ 52.16 FALSIFYING INFORMATION.
   No person shall knowingly make any false statement, representation, record,
report, plan or other document filed with, or to be filed with or taken by, the
city.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-44)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.17 PRE-METERED WATER USAGE.
   (A)   Any land owner using pre-metered water as defined in
§ 52.01 shall be required to pay a fee equal to the minimum monthly rate for
metered water as established from time to time by the City Council. The pre-
metered water usage fee shall be paid at the time of the issuance of a building
permit. The minimum fee collected shall be a two month billing cycle of the
established minimum metered rate. The pre-metered rate shall continue until the
land owner installs an approved water meter. Failure to cause the installation
of a water meter may result in disconnection of water service.
   (B)   The City Council finds that this section is enacted in order to off-
set the loss of water revenue and to establish city criteria in the regulation
of pre-metered water usage.
(Ord. 2000-09, passed 12-11-00)
WATER USE REGULATIONS
§ 52.30 RESPONSIBILITY OF USERS.
   It shall be the responsibility of all water users to prevent contamination
of or damage to water meters or water systems by reason of their operation of
the water outlets and water equipment, and if required by the city, the water
users shall install, at their expense, check valves, surge tanks, backflow
prevention devices, or other devices as prescribed by the Director of Public
works in order to avoid damage to or contamination of the meters or systems.
Check valves and back flow prevention devices must be tested when installed and
annually thereafter at customer's expense.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-5)
§ 52.31 USE OF WATER BY OTHER THAN SUPPLIED PERSON.
   No water user using water supplied by the city, shall supply any other
person with such water or allow any other person the use of such water from the
water user's water connection or permit a further connection to be made to the
water user's connection on his or any other premises unless authorized by the
city.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-21)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.32 IRRIGATING.
   No water shall be used for irrigation purposes by means of an open hose
without a quick-acting positive shut-off nozzle on the hose, nor shall such use
of water be wasted or used except as allowed by the Riverbank Municipal Code.
(Ord. 2016-004, passed 3-8-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.33 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall make connection with the system without first
obtaining a permit from the city.
   (B)   No unauthorized person shall turn on or off or otherwise interfere
with any water line or appurtenant facility.
   (C)   No person shall waste water.
   (D)   No person shall install or maintain any pipe, faucet, hose bib,
fixture or appliance connected to the water system in such condition or state
of disrepair that water may be or is lost or wasted.
   (E)   No person shall supply city water to anyone without city
authorization. The city shall have the right, upon five days' written notice to
cease, to disconnect the water service for the person supplying the water.
   (F)   No person shall construct a bypass around any meter or service.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-36) (Ord. 83-1, passed 3-28-83)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.34 RESTRICTED WATER USE.
   In addition to all other provisions and requirements of this chapter, the
following additional rules and regulations for the use of water are hereby
established. These provisions shall apply to all persons using water in the
city regardless of whether any person using water shall have a contract for
water service with the city.
   (A)   Vehicle washing. The washing of commercial and noncommercial privately
owned automobiles, trucks, trailers, motor homes, boats, buses, and other types
of vehicles is restricted to the use of a hand-held bucket and quick rinses
using a hose with a quick-acting positive shut-off nozzle.
   (B)   Washing exterior surfaces. There shall be no washing of building
exteriors, mobile home exteriors, sidewalks, patios, driveways, gutters or
other exterior surfaces, unless permitted by the Public Works Director, or
Superintendent, or his/her designee, and done with the use of a quick-acting
positive shut-off nozzle on the hose.
   (C)   Outdoor water use. A drought, water shortage, or waste of water may
require the city to implement regulations as expeditiously as such findings
occur. The City Council by resolution shall establish water conservation
regulations to address such findings, which may include but are not limited to
water conservation regulations that are mandated by the state or federal
government.
   (D)   Violations. It shall be unlawful for any customer or person to fail to
comply with any of the provisions set forth by this section or by City Council
resolution. The Enforcement Officer or designee may issue an administrative
citation for failure to comply.
   (E)   Penalties. Failure to comply with any provision, requirement, rules or
regulations under this chapter shall be unlawful and punishable as an
infraction.
      (1)   In addition to the stated penalties, the city may pursue any
available civil remedies and criminal penalties together with any and all costs
incurred by the city as a result of violation of this section or any City
Council resolution adopted pursuant to this section.
      (2)   At the discretion of the Enforcement Officer with the approval of
the City Manager, an issued administrative citation for noncompliance of this
section may be reduced to a formal written warning and the related citation
fines waived or the citation may be cancelled after review of the findings. All
results of a citation issued shall be entered into the record. Any further
violation of the water conservation regulations provided in this section or
adopted pursuant to this section shall result in the imposition of an
administrative citation and its related penalties as set forth herein.
      (3)   Penalties for noncompliance with water conservation regulations
provided in this section or adopted pursuant to this section shall be as
follows and may be amended from time to time by City Council resolution:
         (a)   The fine for the first violation is $100.
         (b)   The fine for the second violation is $200.
         (c)   The fine for the third violation is $300.
         (d)   The fine for the fourth violation is $400.
         (e)   The fine for the fifth violation and each subsequent violation
thereafter is $500.
   (F)   Payment of fines. Fines shall be placed on the customer’s water bill
and paid in accordance with §
52.64 of this chapter.
   (G)   Citation appeal hearing. Any customer or person receiving an
administrative citation for noncompliance of this section may request an appeal
hearing pursuant to the administrative remedies provided in Chapter 99 of the
Riverbank Municipal Code. Any customer or person seeking an appeal hearing of
an issued administrative citation for noncompliance of this section shall file
an appeals request form within 15 days of the citation. Failure to timely file
a request form shall waive the right to appeal the violation. At the end of the
15 day period, all fines incurred for noncompliance with this section shall be
placed on the customer’s water bill for payment.
(Ord. 2016-004, passed 3-8-16)
§ 52.35 BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL.
   (A)   Public water supply protection required. In accordance with the
requirements of 17 Cal. Code of Regs. §§ 7583 through 7622 and Cal. Health &
Safety Code §§ 116800 et seq., no water service connection to any premises
shall be installed or maintained by the city unless the public water supply is
protected as required by state regulations and the requirements stated below.
This section supplements and does not supersede local plumbing regulations,
codes or ordinances or state Department of Public Health Regulations relating
to water supply.
   (B)   Where protection is required. In general, backflow prevention devices
shall be installed on the service connection to any premises having:
      (1)   Any service connection having an auxiliary water supply, or
internal systems containing water of deteriorating quality.
      (2)   Any service connection to any sewage treatment plant, sewage
pumping station, or any premises which handle or transport sewage;
      (3)   Any service connection where any substance is handled under
pressure in such fashion as to permit entry into the water system;
      (4)   Any service connection where material dangerous to health or toxic
substance that might possibly be introduced into the water system;
      (5)   Any premises which is served by more than one meter connection.
      (6)   Any service where lawn or garden sprinkling systems are present
shall have a backflow prevention device installed on the lawn or garden
sprinkler supply line.
      (7)   The type of protection required for each type of premises shall be
as stipulated in the city standards.
   (C)   Private wells prohibited. No person may drill, dig, install or operate
a water well within the city for any purpose without the consent of the city.
   (D)   Existing wells. No person owning or operating an existing well within
the city may furnish water for sale or gift to any other premises. If request
is received to connect to the city water system, from an owner having a well on
his property, that well shall be properly abandoned in accordance with state
and city standards, or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be installed before the connection can be made.
   (E)   Responsibility for installation, inspection and maintenance. Backflow
prevention devices required herein shall be installed in accordance with city
standards at the expense of the customer.
      (1)   All backflow preventers shall be inspected, tested, and maintained
by a certified backflow prevention device tester, on a regular basis and a
report of such activity shall be submitted to the city on forms provided by the
city.
      (2)   In general, the backflow prevention device shall be inspected and
tested at time of installation and thereafter according to the following
schedule:
 
Type of Device             Frequency of Test
Air Gap                    Annually
Reduced Pressure Principle Annually
Double Check Valve         Annually
 
      (3)   All inspections, testing, maintenance and reporting shall be done
at the expense of the customer.
   (F)   Discontinuance of service. The city may shut off service to any
premises and may physically disconnect the customer's piping from the city's
water distribution system if a backflow prevention device required by this
section is not installed, tested, and maintained as required, or if any defect
is found in an installed backflow prevention device, or if it is found that a
backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if unprotected
cross-connection exist on the premises; and service will not be restored until
such conditions or defects are corrected.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-47) (Ord. 85-03, passed 6-24-85)
METERS
§ 52.45 USE OF METERS REQUIRED.
   The quantity of water furnished by the city to all water users shall be
determined and ascertained by a meter.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-10)
§ 52.46 INSTALLATION OF METERS.
   All water meters shall be installed adjacent to and on the property owner's
side of the curbline if installed along a street, and on the property line if
installed in an alley.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-11)
§ 52.47 DAMAGING OR INTERFERING WITH METERS.
   (A)   Water meters and meter boxes are the property of the city and it shall
be unlawful to damage or interfere with them or to place dirt, trash, or other
obstructions on or over the meter boxes.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-12)
   (B)   If a meter or appurtenances are damaged by the carelessness or
negligence of the owner or occupant of the premises, the Public Works
Department will repair the meter and the cost of such repairs shall be charged
against the owner of the property, and if not paid within 30 days, shall become
a lien against said property.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-15)
§ 52.48 METER FAILURES; TESTING.
   (A)   In the event any meter fails to operate properly or to correctly
register the water used, the charge for the period during which the meter fails
to operate properly or fails to register water, shall be based upon the average
daily consumption for the same period of the prior year by the same user. If
such a reading is not available, the city shall estimate the amount of such
consumption from all information available and the consumer shall be charged on
the basis of such estimate for water consumed.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-13)
   (B)   When any water consumer makes a complaint that the bill for any
particular period is excessive, the Public Works Department will, upon request,
have such meter re-read and the service inspected for leaks. Should such
consumer then desire that the meter be tested, he will be required to make a
deposit of $10 to cover the cost of making such test. The meter will then be
changed or tested. Should the meter be found to register over 3% more water
than actually passes through it, another meter will be substituted therefor,
and the fee of $10 shall be refunded to the person making the request. If the
meter is found to register not over 3% the $10 deposit shall be forfeited to
the city and the water bill paid as rendered.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-14)
§ 52.49 CHANGE OF METER LOCATION OR METER SIZE.
   Any person desiring to change the location or size of a service that has
already been installed shall make an application to the city, and, upon payment
in advance of the cost as determined by the city, the city may cause said
change to be made. No such change will be made unless such change is determined
to be feasible and can be done at a reasonable cost.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-19)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 52.60 WATER FUND.
   (A)   The Director of Finance shall collect all monies that shall become due
to the city for water services, connection fees, payments for extensions, and
all other costs, charges, penalties, and fees as provided herein and shall pay
them into the city treasury and account for them in the same manner as the
Director of Finance pays into the city treasury and accounts for all other sums
received in his official capacity.
   (B)   All monies so collected shall be placed in a special fund to be known
as the Water Fund and such money shall thereafter be expended for the
administration, engineering, operation, maintenance and expansion, including
the purchase of land and/or easements, of the city water system.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-4)
§ 52.61 FEES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED BY ORDINANCE.
   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the amounts of all charges
provided for herein, including but not limited to, water rates, connection
fees, deposits, turn-on charges, penalties, and reconnection fees, shall be
established from time to time by ordinance of the City Council. The failure to
pay any fee or charge pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a violation of
this code and shall be subject to fines and penalties set forth in the city
code.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-38) (Am. Ord. 2016-004, passed 3-8-16)
   (A)   Water service charges. The bimonthly rates for water service are as
follows:
      (1)   The minimum bimonthly charge to all water users, by water meter
size for up to 1,000 cubic feet of water, is established as follows:
 
             October 1, July 1, 2016 July 1, 2017 July 1, 2018 July 1, 2019
             2015
1.5" & below $39.54     $45.46       $49.10       $51.56       $54.14
2"           $63.26     $72.74       $78.58       $82.48       $86.62
3"           $126.54    $145.48      $157.14      $164.98      $173.24
4" & above   $197.70    $227.30      $245.54      $257.78      $270.68
 
      (2)   Quantity rates for all water users exceeding the 1,000 cubic foot
minimum charge for the particular meter size shall be:
 
               October 1, July 1, 2016 July 1, 2017 July 1, 2018 July 1, 2019
               2015
Base           $0.46      $0.53        $0.57        $0.60        $0.63
Drought        - -        $0.07*       $0.16*       $0.28*       $0.30*
Surcharge *
Total Variable $0.46      $0.60        $0.73        $0.88        $0.92
Charge*
 
   All rates expressed in the table are on a per 100 cubic feet basis
   * Drought surcharges will be applied only during billing periods in which
conservation mandates are in effect due to ongoing drought conditions, as
required by the state or under the city’s Urban Water Management Plan.
   (B)   Connection fees. Connection fees for water service for properties in
the city shall be as follows:
      (1)   Connection fees in subdivisions shall be determined at the time of
recording the final map.
      (2)   Connection fees for parcels not in subdivisions (infill) shall be
as follows:
 
                                                 Rate
Residential - with no existing stubout           $1,700.00
Residential - with existing stubout              $800.00
Commercial/Industrial - with no existing stubout $1,700.00
Commercial/Industrial - with existing stubout    $800.00
 
   (C)   Inspection fee. A $75 water meter inspection fee will be required per
inspection.
   (D)   Well destruction permit. Any property owner seeking to abandon their
well must first obtain a well destruction permit from the City of Riverbank
Public Works Department. The fee for the permit shall be $75.
(Ord. 83-1, passed 3-28-83; Am. Ord. 2005-005, passed 4-25-05; Am. Ord. 2005-
008, passed 5-9-05; Am. Ord. 2005-012, passed 7-11-05; Am. Ord. 2006-010,
passed 7-10-06; Am. Ord. 2007-003, passed 7-9-07; Am. Ord. 2008-007, passed 7-
14-08; Am. Ord. 2010-001, passed 6-28-10; Am. Ord. 2015-015, passed 10-13-15)
§ 52.62 WHEN CHARGES DUE.
   All water charges, fees and deposits shall be paid at the time service is
requested. No building, plumbing or electrical permit shall be issued until
said water charges, fees and deposits are paid.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-39) (Ord. 83-1, passed 3-28-83)
§ 52.63 WATER CHARGES AS A LIEN.
   Each charge levied by or pursuant to this chapter or any resolution adopted
pursuant to this chapter, is hereby made a lien upon the property which
received the benefit of the service or facility for which the charge was made,
and any steps authorized by law may be taken by the city to enforce payment of
such lien.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-40) (Ord. 83-1, passed 3-28-83)
§ 52.64 PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   (A)   Water bills shall be rendered on a bimonthly basis and are due and
payable upon receipt and shall be considered delinquent if not paid seven days
after mailing or e-mailing by the city.
   (B)   Any bill which is not paid by close of business 35 calendar days after
the bill is issued, shall be subject to a 10% penalty. If the bill is not paid
within 60 days after it becomes delinquent, the water service may be
discontinued and an additional charge for the subsequent turn-on shall be paid
by the consumer according to the requirements established in the city's
Residential Water Shut-Off Policy adopted by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   When a service is discontinued due to nonpayment of bills, service
shall not be resumed until all charges and penalties are paid pursuant to the
procedures set forth in §
52.66. All charges and penalties which are not paid shall become a lien on the
property. Termination of service shall not be effective to a residential
dwelling for nonpayment while an investigation of a customer dispute or
complaint is pending or in progress by the city. Termination of water service
shall not be affected on any Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or at any time
during which the business offices of the city are not open to the public.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-41) (Ord. 83-1, passed 3-28-83; Am. Ord. 93-06, passed 11-22-
93; Am. Ord. 2005-012, passed 7-11-05; Am. Ord. 2022-005, passed 9-27-22)
§ 52.65 DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Applicants for utility services are required to establish credit
before receiving such service. Credit shall be deemed established if the
applicant meets one of the following options:
      (1)   Makes a cash deposit of $60 as a guarantee for the payment of
future bills.
      (2)   Has been a customer of city utility services for 12 consecutive
months within the last 18 months, and during such time has paid all bills
without any delinquency.
      (3)   Provide the city with a letter of credit reference from another
utility company showing an on-time payment record for the period of at least
the 12 consecutive months directly prior to the date of the requested service.
   (B)   If a consumer's service is disconnected for nonpayment, the city may
apply the deposit insofar as necessary to liquidate the account and may require
that the deposit be restored to an amount twice the original deposit amount.
   (C)   After a cash deposit to guarantee payment for metered or measured
water service has stood unimpaired for 12 months, such deposit shall be applied
to the depositor's current account balance. Upon closing any account, the
balance of any deposit remaining, after the closing bill for service has been
paid, shall be returned promptly to the depositor.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-42) (Ord. 83-1, passed 3-28-83; Am. Ord. 2000-04, passed 4-10-
00; Am. Ord. 2005-005, passed 4-25-05; Am. Ord. 2022-005, passed 9-27-22)
§ 52.66 DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.
      (A)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill;
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a written cut-
off notice will be sent to the customer in accordance with the city's
Residential Water Shut-Off Policy, detailing the date by which payment or
arrangement for payment is required to avoid discontinuation of service and
options for payment to avert discontinuation of service; and
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing, at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel, or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.
   (B)   The city may adjust or delay payment of water bills in accordance with
the city's Residential Water Shut-Off Policy that has been adopted by
resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service
to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge, the
amount of which shall be governed by the city's Residential Water Shut-Off
Policy, adopted by resolution of the City Council.
(Am. Ord. 2022-005, passed 9-27-22)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 52.75 MANAGEMENT OF SYSTEM.
   The management, control and care of the city water system shall be vested in
the City Manager under the direction of the City Council.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-3)
§ 52.76 ACCESS TO BE PROVIDED TO CITY.
   Access to service connections, turn-off valves and meters must be provided
for the city at all times.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-28)
§ 52.77 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Any authorized agent of the city shall have the right at all times during
reasonable hours to enter any premises being supplied with water for the
purpose of examining the condition of water pipes, water closets, and other
plumbing, and in case a leak is found, to shut off the water until the leak is
repaired by the consumer.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-30)
§ 52.78 RIGHT TO SHUT OFF WATER MAINS.
   The city shall have the right at any time to shut off, ration, or apportion
water by reason of an emergency, shortage or water supply, or for making
repairs, modifications, changes or other work in city water service facilities.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-31)
§ 52.79 TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
   Whenever the Water Department receives a written request from any property
owner to terminate or discontinue water service to any property for the reason
that the property is unoccupied and does not require such service, the Water
Department shall terminate water and sewer services as of the date such notice
is received, and shall make no further charges for water or sewer services
until the owner requests resumption of service. Until such request is received,
all such charges as provided shall be due and payable.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-33)
§ 52.80 CORRECTION OF VIOLATION.
   In order to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the city may correct any
violation of this chapter. The cost of such correction, including attorney's
fees, may be added to any water service charge payable by the person occupying
the property upon which the violation occurred, and the city shall have such
remedies for the collection of such costs as it has for the collection of water
service charges.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-43)
§ 52.81 VIOLATION AN INFRACTION.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction.
(`67 Code, § 4-6-46) (Ord. 83-1, passed 3-28-83)
CHAPTER 53: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
Section
   
53.01   Title
   
53.02   Purpose and intent
   
53.03   Definitions
   
53.04   Conflicts with other laws
   
53.05   Discharge of non-storm water prohibited
   
53.06   Exceptions to discharge prohibition
   
53.07   Groundwater discharges
   
53.08   Discharge in violation of permit
   
53.09   Illicit connections prohibited
   
53.10   Concealment and abetting
   
53.11   Acts potentially resulting in violation of Federal Clean Water Act and/
or Porter-Cologne Act
   
53.12   Reduction of pollutants in storm water
   
53.13   Containment and notification of spills
   
53.14   Inspection authority
   
53.15   Enforcement authority
   
53.16   Abatement by city
   
53.17   Charging cost of abatement; liens
   
53.18   Violations
   
53.19   Remedies not exclusive
   
53.20   Appeal
   
53.21   Disclaimer of liability
   
53.22   City authority
   
53.23   Judicial review
§ 53.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the city "Storm Water Management and
Discharge Control Ordinance," of the City of Riverbank and may be cited as
such.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city by controlling non-storm
water discharges to the storm water conveyance system from spills, dumping, or
disposal of materials other than storm water, and by reducing pollutants in
urban storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable.
   (B)   This chapter is intended to assist in the protection and enhancement
of the water quality of watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands in a manner
pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.) by reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent
practicable and by prohibiting non-storm water discharges into the storm drain
system.
   (C)   The scope provides for the control and regulation of discharges to the
MS4 and receiving waters, through a program of education and enforcement of
general and specific prohibitions and requirements. This chapter applies to all
dischargers and places of discharge located within the city that discharge
storm water or non-storm water into any MS4 or receiving waters. Through a
program employing watershed-based approaches that balance environmental and
economic considerations, the city seeks to protect and promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens with the implementation of
the following objectives:
      (1)   To comply with all federal and state laws, lawful standards, and
orders applicable to storm water and urban runoff pollution control;
      (2)   To prohibit and reasonably control any discharge that may interfere
with the operation of, or cause any damage to the MS4, or impair the beneficial
uses of the receiving waters;
      (3)   To prohibit illicit discharges to the MS4;
      (4)   Reduce storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and non-
point source pollution wherever feasible, through storm water management
controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained;
      (5)   To reduce pollutants in storm water and urban runoff;
      (6)   To reduce unauthorized non-storm water discharges to the MS4 to the
maximum extent practicable;
      (7)   To develop and implement effective educational outreach programs
designed to educate the public on issues of storm water and urban runoff
pollution;
      (8)   To establish adequate legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring, or other procedures necessary to ensure compliance
with this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
education practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to
prevent or reduce to the maximum extend practicable the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to waters of the United States. BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, and drainage from raw material storage.
   CALIFORNIA STORM WATER QUALITY ASSOCIATION or CASQA. The California Storm
Water Quality Association, a professional member association dedicated to
information sharing and the advancement of storm water quality management.
   CITY. The City of Riverbank.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.). and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre
or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating and demolition.
   DEVELOPMENT. The building or placement of any structure or portion thereof.
DEVELOPMENT includes excavation and grading.
   EMPLOYEE TRAINING PROGRAM. A documented employee training program which may
be required to be implemented by a business pursuant to a storm water pollution
prevention plan for the purpose of educating its employees on methods of
reducing discharge of pollutants to the storm water conveyance system,
   ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. The City of Riverbank.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The Director of Public Works or his or her designee or
any agent of the city authorized to enforce compliance with this chapter.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quality, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, or transported, disposed of
or otherwise managed (Cal. Health and Safety Code § 25117).
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm water conveyance system that
violates this chapter, or is prohibited by federal, state, or local laws, or
which degrades the quality of receiving waters in violation of any plan
standard.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Any physical connection to the storm water conveyance
system, which is not authorized by the City of Riverbank and the Regional Water
Quality Control Board Central Valley Region.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board or the State Water Resources
Control Board pursuant to Division 7, Chapter 5.5 of the California Water Code
(commencing with § 13370) to control discharges from point sources to waters of
the United States.
   NONCOMMERCIAL VEHICLE WASHING. The washing and rinsing of passenger vehicles
on private property in which no commercial enterprise is being conducted in the
washing of those vehicles.
   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm water-conveyance
system that is not entirely composed of storm water.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, business entity, or public agency,
whether principal, agent, employee, or otherwise.
   PLAN STANDARD. Any or all applicable requirements of the basin plan or any
other approved plan.
   POLLUTANT. Any contaminant, which can degrade the quality of the receiving
water in violation of any plan standard.
   PREMISES. Any contaminant, which can degrade the quality of the receiving
water in violation of any plan standard.
   PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT. The Public Works Superintendent of the City of
Riverbank.
   STORM WATER. Surface runoff and drainage associated with storm events, which
is free of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable.
   STORM WATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM. Those artificial and natural facilities
within the City of Riverbank, whether publicly or privately owned, by which
storm water may be conveyed to a watercourse or waters of the United States,
including any roads with drainage systems, streets, catch  basins, natural and
artificial channels, aqueducts, stream beds, gullies, curbs, gutters, ditches,
open fields, parking lots, impervious surfaces used for parking, and natural
and artificial channels or storm drains.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A document which describes the best
management practices to be implemented by the owner or operator of a business
to eliminate non-storm water discharges and/or reduce to the maximum extent
practicable pollutant discharges to the storm water conveyance system.
   WATERCOURSE. Any natural stream, whether flowing continuously or not, that
is fed from permanent or natural sources, and includes, without limitation to
rivers, creeks, runs, and rivulets.
   Any term(s) defined in the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and/or
defined in the regulations for the storm water discharge permitting program
issued by the Environmental Protection Agency, as amended, and which are not
specifically defined in this section shall, when used in this chapter, have the
same meaning as set forth in said act or regulation.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.04 CONFLICTS WITH OTHER LAWS.
   In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any federal or state
law, regulation, order, or permit, that requirement which establishes the
higher standard for public health or safety shall govern. To the extent
permitted by law, nothing in this chapter shall preclude enforcement of any
other applicable law, regulation, order, or permit.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.05 DISCHARGE OF NON-STORM WATER PROHIBITED.
   Except as provided in § 53.06 of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person
to make or cause to be made any non-storm water discharge. Notwithstanding the
exemptions provided by § 53.06 of this chapter, if the Regional Water Quality
Control Board or the enforcement official determines that any otherwise exempt
discharge causes or significantly contributes to violations of any plan
standard, or conveys significant quantities of pollutants to surface water(s)
or watercourse(s), or is a danger to public health or safety, such discharge
shall be prohibited from entering the storm water conveyance system.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.06 EXCEPTIONS TO DISCHARGE PROHIBITION.
   Subject to the authority granted to the Regional Water Quality Control Board
and the enforcement official in §
53.05, the following discharges to the storm water conveyance system are exempt
from the prohibition set forth in §
53.05.
   (A)   Any discharge of connections regulated under a NPDES permit issued to
the discharger and administered by the State of California pursuant to Division
7, Chapter 5.5 of the California Water Code, provided that the discharger is in
compliance with all requirements of the permit and all other applicable laws
and regulations;
   (B)   Discharges from the following activities, which do not cause or
contribute to the violation of any NPDES permit:
      (1)   Water line flushing and other discharges from potable water
sources;
      (2)   Incidental runoff from landscaped areas defined as unintended
amounts (volume) of runoff, such as unintended, minimal over-spray from
sprinklers that escape the area of intended use;
      (3)   Rising ground waters or springs:
      (4)   Passive foundation and footing drains;
      (5)   Water from crawl space pumps and basement pumps;
      (6)   Air conditioning condensation;
      (7)   Noncommercial vehicle washing;
      (8)   Natural flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
      (9)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
      (10)   Flows from fire suppression activities, including fire hydrant
flows;
      (11)   Waters not otherwise containing wastes as defined in Cal. Water
Code § 13050(d) and Cal. Health and Safety Code § 25117;
      (12)   Diverted stream flows;
      (13)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration to separate storm sewers;
      (14)   Any discharge, which the enforcement official, the local health
officer, or the Regional Water Quality Control Board determines in writing is
necessary for the protection of the public health and safety;
      (15)   Any discharge caused by flooding or other natural disaster, which
could not have been reasonably foreseen or mitigated for in advance by the
discharger, as determined by the enforcement official.
   (C)   Conditional exemptions from discharge prohibition consist of the
following non-storm water discharges to the MS4 are exempt from the prohibition
set forth in division (A) and may be allowed to be discharged into the MS4,
subject to all appropriate BMPs and prior written authorization by the
Director. The "conditionally exempt discharges" are as follows:
      (1)   De-chlorinated and non-salt water swimming pool discharges where
the water cannot be readily discharged to the sanitary sewer system or allowed
to completely percolate into the ground;
      (2)   Discharges from charity vehicle washing;
      (3)   Street, driveway, and sidewalk washing; and
      (4)   Other categories approved by the Executive Officer of the Regional
Water Board, or an authorized representative.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.07 GROUNDWATER DISCHARGES.
   Discharges of pumped groundwater not subject to a NPDES permit may be
permitted to discharge to the storm water conveyance system upon written
approval from the city and in compliance with conditions of approval set forth
by the city.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.08 DISCHARGE IN VIOLATION OF PERMIT.
   It is unlawful for any person to cause either individually or jointly any
discharge to the storm water conveyance system, which results in or contributes
to a violation.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.09 ILLICIT CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to establish, use, or maintain any illicit
connection to the storm water conveyance system. This prohibition expressly
includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless
of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection. A person is considered to be in violation
of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to a storm water
conveyance system, or allows such a connection to continue.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.10 CONCEALMENT AND ABETTING.
   It is unlawful and a violation for any person causing, permitting, aiding,
abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.11 ACTS POTENTIALLY RESULTING IN VIOLATION OF FEDERAL CLEAN WATER ACT AND/
OR PORTER-COLOGNE ACT.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any provision of any
permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who discharges waste or wastewater
which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order,
prohibition, or effluent limitation, may also be in violation of the Federal
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and/or Porter-Cologne Water Quality
Control Act (Cal. Water Code §§ 13000 et seq.) and may be subject to the
sanctions of those Acts including civil and criminal penalties.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.12 REDUCTION OF POLLUTANTS IN STORM WATER.
   Any person engaged in activities which may result in pollutants entering the
storm water conveyance system shall, to the maximum extent practicable,
undertake the measures set forth below to reduce the risk of non-storm water
discharge and/or pollutant discharge.
   (A)   Business related activities.
      (1)   Storm water pollution prevention plan.
         (a)   The enforcement official may require any business in the city
that is engaged in activities which may result in pollutant discharges to
develop and implement a storm water pollution prevention plan, which must
include an employee training program.
         (b)   Business activities which may require a storm water pollution
prevention plan include, but are not limited to, maintenance, storage,
manufacturing, assembly, equipment operations, vehicle loading or fueling, or
cleanup procedures which are carried out partially or wholly out of doors.
      (2)   Coordination with hazardous materials release response plans and
inventory. Any business requiring a hazardous materials release response and
inventory plan under Chapter 6.95 (commencing with § 25500) of Division 20 of
the California Health and Safety Code, shall include in that plan provisions
for compliance with this chapter, including the provisions prohibiting non-
storm water discharges and illegal discharges, and requiring the release of
pollutants to be reduced to the maximum extend practicable.
      (3)   Coordination with hazardous waste generator contingency plan and
emergency procedures. Any business requiring a hazardous waste generator
contingency plan and emergency procedures pursuant to California Code of
Regulations, Title 22, §§ 66265.51 to 66265.56, shall include in that plan
provisions for compliance with this chapter, including the provisions
prohibiting non-storm water discharge and illegal discharges, and requiring the
release of pollutants to be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
   (B)   Construction.
      (1)   Any person performing construction activities in the city shall
prevent pollutants from entering the storm water conveyance system and comply
with all applicable federal, Stale and local laws, ordinances or regulations,
including but not limited to, the current California NPDES General Permit for
storm water discharges associated with construction activity (Construction
General Permit) and the City Storm Water Management and Discharge Control
Ordinance. All construction projects, regardless of size, having soil
disturbance or activities exposed to storm water must, at a minimum, implement
BMPs for erosion and sediment controls, soil stabilization, dewatering, source
controls, pollution prevention measures, and prohibited discharges.
      (2)   Any person subject to a construction activity NPDES storm water
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with the permit may be required in a form acceptable to the
enforcement official prior to, or as a condition of. a subdivision map, site
plan, building permit, grading permit, or development or improvement plan, upon
inspection of the facility, during any enforcement proceeding or action, or for
any other reasonable cause. Prior to issuance of a construction permit or
approval of the proposed improvement plans, for projects subject to the state's
current Construction NPDES General Permit, the WDID number and the SWPPP shall
be submitted to the city. For projects with less than an acre of soil
disturbance or not subject to the Construction General Permit, an Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan (ESCP) and the ESCP Worksheet must be submitted to the
city.
      (3)   As required by its Phase II MS4 NPDES Permit, the city will conduct
storm water compliance inspections at applicable construction sites that have
areas of soil disturbance exposed to storm water. The inspection will be
conducted by a city inspector or agent working for the city who is a Qualified
SWPPP Practitioner (QSP) or is supervised by a QSP. The inspection will
evaluate the construction site's compliance to the city's storm water
ordinances. Inspections will be billed by the city to the project owner. The
following is the risk rating system and inspection frequency the city will use,
which is analogous to the risk rating used by the California Construction
General Permit:
         (a)   Projects not subject to the CGP or that have an Erosivity Waiver
will have a pre-soil disturbance inspection and a project completion
inspection.
         (b)   Projects that are Risk 1/LUP Type 1 or Risk 2/LUP Type 2 will
have a pre-soil disturbance inspection, monthly inspections, and a project
completion inspection.
         (c)   Projects that are Risk 3/LUP Type 3 will have a pre-soil
disturbance inspection, bimonthly (twice per month) inspections, and a project
completion inspection.
      (4)   If a project has been issued two consecutive notices of violation
or does not correct a previously issued notice of violation by the due date set
by the inspector, the project's "threat to water quality" will be elevated by
the city to the next highest category. This elevation of risk will not affect
the risk rating for the Construction General Permit.
   (C)   Development.
      (1)   The enforcement official may develop controls as appropriate to
minimize the long-term, post construction discharge of storm water pollutants
from new development(s) or modifications to existing development(s). Controls
may include source control measures to prevent pollution of storm water and/or
treatment controls designed to remove pollutants from storm water, low impact
development measures, and/or hydromodification measures to offset the
difference between the pre and post-construction peak flow runoff rates and
volumes. Proponents of all applicable development and redevelopment projects
will be required to meet the requirements and design standards specified in the
current State of California Phase II MS4 NPDES permit.
      (2)   At the earliest planning stages, project proponents shall assess
and evaluate how site conditions, such as soils, vegetation, and flow paths
will influence the placement of buildings and paved surfaces. The evaluation
will be used to optimize the site layout to meet the goals of capturing and
treating runoff. Each project proponent will submit a map of the project
dividing the site into discrete drainage management areas to show in each how
runoff will be managed using site design measures, source controls, treatment
controls, and hydromodification measures as defined by the current MS4 permit.
All site design measures, source controls, treatment controls, and
hydromodification measures must be selected, sized, and situated in accordance
with the guidance provided in the current MS4 permit. Documentation of the
site's post-construction storm water design measures must be submitted to the
city's Planning Department for review and approval prior to the commencement of
the project.
      (3)   Project proponents must sign an operation and maintenance agreement
in which they legally bind themselves to maintain the installed post-
construction design measures in an effective and good operational condition
until the property ownership is transferred. A written operation and
maintenance plan for the proposed storm water design measures is required to be
submitted to and approved by the city with the signed agreement. The agreement
will be recorded with the deed by the County Clerk making it transferrable to
the new owner; or, when there are multiple property owners responsible for the
maintenance of the control measures, the agreement will consist of a legally
binding covenant between the city and the homeowners association or maintenance
district. The owner or association responsible for the maintenance of the
control measures may be required by the city to submit an annual self-
certification that the storm water control measures are effective and are being
maintained in accordance with the submitted and approved Operation and
Maintenance Plan.
   (D)   Compliance with Industrial or Construction Activity Storm Water
Permit.
      (1)   Any person subject to the state's current Industrial NPDES General
Permit for storm water discharge shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with the permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the enforcement official upon inspection of the facility; during
any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause.
      (2)   Any person subject to the state's current Construction NPDES
General Permit for storm water discharge shall comply with all provisions of
such permit. Proof of compliance with the permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the enforcement official prior to or as a condition of a
subdivision map, site plan, building permit, and development or improvement
plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or
action; or for any other reasonable cause.
      (3)   Compliance with best management practices. Every person or entity,
including the above-listed categories, undertaking any activity or use of
premises that may cause or contribute to storm water pollution or contamination
or illicit discharges shall comply with best management practice (BMPs)
consistent with the California Storm Water Quality Association (CASQA) Best
Management Practice Handbooks or equivalent guidelines,
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.13 CONTAINMENT AND NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   Any person owning or occupying a premises who has knowledge of any release
of pollutants or non-storm water discharge from or across those premises which
might enter the storm water conveyance system, other than a release or
discharge that is permitted by this chapter, shall immediately take all
reasonable action to contain and abate the release of pollutants or non-storm
water discharge, and shall notify the enforcement agency within 24 hours of the
release of pollutants or non-storm water discharge. For the purpose of
containment, all vehicles within 100 feet of a storm water management facility
shall be stored and parked on a paved surface that is capable of containing all
reasonably expected discharges from vehicles to the satisfaction of the
Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.14 INSPECTION AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Right of entry.
      (1)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this chapter, or whenever an authorized enforcement official has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any
premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the
enforcement official may enter such building or premises at all reasonable
times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the officer by this
chapter.
      (2)   Any request for entry shall state that the property owner or
occupant has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is
refused, inspection may be made upon issuance of a warrant issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
      (3)   In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after such request
has been made, the enforcement official is empowered to seek assistance from
any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
   (B)   Photographs. The Enforcement Official may, in the course of
inspection, photograph the premises to memorialize (he inspection as it relates
to regulation by this chapter or any other local, state, or federal law.
Photographs may be taken of any facility, mechanism, apparatus, means or method
thought to contribute to or facilitate a suspected violation.
   (C)   Sampling authority. Inspections shall be based upon such reasonable
selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of
this chapter, including but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in
areas with evidence of storm water contamination, illegal discharge, non-storm
water discharge to the storm water conveyance system, or similar factors.
   (D)   Sampling methods.
      (1)   During any inspection, the enforcement official may take samples as
necessary in order to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   This authority may include the installation of sampling and
metering devices on private property, or requiring the person owning or
occupying the premises to supply samples.
   (E)   Monitoring, analysis and reporting authority.
      (1)   The enforcement official may require monitoring, analysis and
reporting of discharges from any premises to the storm water conveyance system.
      (2)   Upon service of written notice by the enforcement official, the
burden, including cost, of these activities, analyses and reports, incurred in
complying with the requirement shall, to the extent permitted by law, be borne
by the property owner or occupant of the facility or activity for which testing
and monitoring has been requested.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.15 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   General enforcement authority.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director of Public Works
shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Director of Public
Works may be delegated by the Director of Public Works to other city personnel.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95)
   (B)   Administrative enforcement powers. The enforcement official may also
exercise any of the following supplemental enforcement powers as may be
necessary or advisable in the enforcement official's judgment under the
circumstances:
      (1)   Notice of Violation (NOV).
         (a)   Whenever the enforcement official finds that any person owning
or occupying a premises has violated or is violating this chapter or order
issued hereunder, the enforcement official may serve a written NOV upon such
person, by personal service, or by registered or certified mail.
         (b)   Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, or shorter period
as may be prescribed in the NOV, an explanation of the violation and a plan for
the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, which shall include
specific required actions, shall be submitted to the enforcement official.
         (c)   Submission of this plan shall in no way relieve the person of
liabilities for violations occurring before or after receipt of the NOV.
      (2)   Cease and desist orders.
         (a)   The enforcement official may require any person owning or
occupying a premises to cease and desist all activities that may cause or
contribute to discharge in violation of this chapter.
         (b)   This order may also require such person to:
            1.   Comply with the applicable provisions of the chapter within a
designated period of time; or
            2.   Take appropriate remedial or preventative action to keep the
violation from recurring.
      (3)   Notice to clean and abate.
         (a)   The enforcement official may require any person owning or
occupying a premise to clean up and abate any release of pollutants on that
premise which may result in a violation of this chapter.
         (b)   The enforcement official may also order abatement of activities
or practices, which may reasonably result in such a violation.
      (4)   Mitigation. The enforcement official shall have authority to order
the mitigation of circumstances, which may result in or contribute to illegal
discharges.
      (5)   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. The enforcement official
shall have the authority to establish elements of a storm water pollution
prevention plan, and to require any business to adopt and implement such a
plan, as may be reasonably necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.
      (6)   Best management practices. The enforcement official may establish
the requirements of best management practices for any premises.
      (7)   Violations constituting misdemeanors. In addition to civil
penalties provided for in this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be
punishable as a misdemeanor.
      (8)   Violations deemed a public nuisance.
         (a)   In addition to the penalties hereinbefore provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is a threat to the public health, safety or welfare and is thus
deemed a nuisance.
         (b)   Any such nuisance may be summarily abated and/or restored by any
authorized to pursue civil action(s) pursuant to division (B) of this section
to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of the nuisance.
      (9)   Cost recovery.
         (a)   The cost of the abatement and restoration shall be borne by the
owner of the property and the cost therefore shall be invoiced to the owner of
the property.
         (b)   If the invoice is not paid within 60 days, the enforcement
official shall have the authority to place a lien upon and against the
property.
         (c)   If the lien is not satisfied within three months, the
enforcement official is authorized to take all legal measures as are available
to enforce the lien as a judgment, including, without limitation, enforcing the
lien in an action bought for a money judgment or by delivery to the county
assessor of a special assessment against the property in accordance with Cal.
Gov’t Code § 38773.5.
      (10)   Seasonal and recurrent nuisance.
         (a)   If any violation of this chapter constitutes a seasonal and
recurrent nuisance, the enforcement official shall so declare.
         (b)   Thereafter such seasonal and recurrent nuisance shall be abated
every year without the necessity of any further hearing.
      (11)   Costs of enforcement.
         (a)   If the city prevails in any administrative, civil, or criminal
proceeding initiated under this chapter, the city shall be entitled to seek
reimbursement for all costs incurred in connection with said proceeding.
         (b)   Such reimbursable expenses may include, but are not limited to,
costs of investigation, administrative overhead, out-of-pocket expenses, costs
of administrative hearings, and costs of suit.
         (c)   If any such costs are granted to the city, said costs shall be
recoverable pursuant to division (A)(9) of this section.
   (C)   Civil action.
      (1)   In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any
violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the city
attorney.
      (2)   Monies recovered under this division shall be paid to the city to
be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing storm
water discharge pollution control systems and/or implementing or enforcing the
provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   In any such action, the city may seek, as appropriate, any or all
of the following remedies:
         (a)   A temporary and/or permanent injunction;
         (b)   Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation,
inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the
violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action
under this division;
         (c)   Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the
adverse effects resulting from the violation;
         (d)   Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality,
wildlife, fish and aquatic life.
   (D)   Emergency orders and abatements.
      (1)   The enforcement official may order the abatement of any discharge
from any source to the storm water conveyance system when, in the opinion of
the enforcement official, the discharge causes or threatens to cause a
condition which presents an imminent danger to the public health, safety, or
welfare, or the environment, or a violation of a NPDES permit.
      (2)   In emergency situations where the property owner or other
responsible party is unavailable and time constraints are such that service of
a notice and order to abate cannot be effected without presenting an immediate
danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, or the environment or a
violations of NPDES permit, the city may perform or cause to be performed such
work as shall be necessary to abate said threat or danger.
      (3)   The costs of any such abatement shall be borne by the owner and
shall be collectable in accordance with the provisions of division (A)(9) of
this section.
   (E)   Contents of notice. Any NOV, cease and desist order, or other civil
notice or civil order issued by the enforcement official pursuant to this
chapter shall include a copy of §
53.20 outlining appeal rights.
(Am. Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.16 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   (A)   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements
set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal under §
53.20, within ten days of the decision of the City Manager upholding the
decision of the Public Works Director, then the city or a contractor designated
by the Public Works Superintendent shall enter upon the subject private
property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in
possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city or designated contractor
to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95; Am. Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-
012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.17 CHARGING COST OF ABATEMENT; LIENS.
   (A)   Within 30 days after abatement of the nuisance by city, the Public
Works Superintendent shall notify the property owner of the property of the
cost of abatement, including administrative costs.
   (B)   Within 15 days, the property owner may file with the City Clerk a
written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment.
      (1)   The City Clerk shall set the matter for public hearing by the City
Council.
      (2)   The decision of the City Council shall be set forth by resolution
and shall be final.
   (C)   If the amount due is not paid within ten days of the decision of the
City Council or the expiation of the time in which to file an appeal under this
section the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and
shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
   (D)   A copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the County Auditor so
that the auditor may enter the amounts of the assessment against the parcel as
it appears on the current assessment roll, and the tax collector shall include
the amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes levied against the parcel of
land.
(Ord 95-05, passed 4-10-95; Am. Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-
012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.18 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this
chapter or fail to comply with any of the requirements.
   (B)   A violation of or failure to comply with any of the requirements of
this chapter shall constitute an infraction and therefore shall be subject to
the following fines:
      (1)   $500 upon the first offense;
      (2)   $1,000 upon the second offense;
      (3)   $3,000 upon the third and each subsequent offense.
   (C)   If any violation is continued, each day's violation shall be deemed a
separate violation.
(Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95; Am. Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-
012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.19 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   (A)   Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or
limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal.
   (B)   The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.20 APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person served with a NOV, who is subject to a cease and desist
order, who is subject to an abatement order, who is required to perform
monitoring, analyzes, reporting and/or corrective activities by an authorized
enforcement official, or who is otherwise grieved by the decision of the
authorized enforcement official, may appeal the decision to the Public Works
Superintendent within ten days following the effective date of the decision by
filing a written appeal with the Public Works Superintendent.
   (B)   The Public Works Superintendent shall request a report and
recommendation from the authorized enforcement official and shall set the
matter for hearing at the earliest practical date.
      (1)   Due notice of the hearing shall be provided to the person appealing
the decision of the authorized enforcement official.
      (2)   At the hearing, the Public Works Superintendent may hear additional
evidence, and may reject, affirm or modify the authorized enforcement
official's decision.
      (3)   The Public Works Superintendent decision shall be final.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.21 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering, and
other relevant technical considerations.
   (B)   The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this chapter
does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized
discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States.
   (C)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any
officer or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on the
code or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.22 CITY AUTHORITY.
   The enforcement official is authorized to make any decision on behalf of the
city required or called for by this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
§ 53.23 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   The provisions of Cal. Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1094.5 and 1094.6 are
applicable to judicial review of city decisions pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-002, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2015-012, passed 6-23-15)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
70.   TRAFFIC RULES
         
71.   STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
         
72.   BICYCLES
         
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
         
74.   USE OF ENGINE OR TRANSMISSION BRAKING DEVICES
         
75.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
         
76.   TURNING MOVEMENTS
         
77.   ONE-WAY ALLEYS
         
78.   RIGHT-OF-WAY
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
   
70.01   Definitions of words and phrases
   
70.02   Interference with fire apparatus
   
70.03   Clinging to moving vehicle
   
70.04   Driving on sidewalks, new pavement, public lawns
   
70.05   Crosswalks
   
70.06   Crossing at right angles
   
70.07   Speed limits
   
70.08   Weight limits
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   (A)   The words and phrases used in this title shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this chapter.
   (B)   Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined
herein, but are now or hereafter defined in the Vehicle Code, such definitions
are incorporated herein and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used in this chapter as though set forth herein in full.
      BUS LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles operated by a public carrier during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
      CITY. The City of Riverbank.
      COUNCIL. The Council of the City of Riverbank.
      CURB. The lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by
curbing construction, or not so marked. The word CURB, as used in this chapter,
shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips
in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility
companies.
      DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director/City Engineer of the city.
      FREIGHT LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of commercial vehicles during the loading or unloading of
materials.
      HOLIDAYS. For the purpose of this title only, HOLIDAYS shall be as
specified in Cal. Gov’t Code § 6700, as the same now exists or may hereafter be
amended.
      LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter,
they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use
in the city.
      PARKING METER. A mechanical device installed within or upon the curb or
sidewalk area, immediately adjacent to a parking space, for the purpose of
controlling the period of time occupancy of such parking meter space by any
vehicle is permitted.
      PARKWAY. That portion of a street other than a roadway or sidewalk.
      PASSENGER LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
      PICKUP. To take aboard a load or cargo of the type or kind that the
vehicle is designed to haul.
      POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the Police Department of the city, or
any officer authorized to direct, regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
      PUBLIC PARKING FACILITY. Any lot, space or area within the city now or
hereafter used for off-street parking of vehicles by members of the public, and
owned or operated for such use by the city.
      STATE. The State of California.
      TRUCK ROUTE. A street, avenue or thoroughfare over and upon which
vehicles designed or used for the transportation of commodities or materials
may be driven and operated regardless of weight and size of the vehicles;
provided the vehicles do not exceed the size and weight of vehicles permitted
by state law to be driven upon or over highways and streets within the State of
California.
      VEHICLE CODE. The Vehicle Code of the State of California.
(Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-09)
§ 70.02 INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE APPARATUS.
   (A)   No driver of a vehicle shall follow any fire apparatus answering a
fire alarm, closer than 500 feet or park any vehicle within 300 feet of a fire,
or operate or park any vehicle in such a manner as to interfere with any fire
apparatus or line of fire hose when in use at a fire or when in place for use
in response to a fire alarm.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire
Department when laid on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire
or alarm of fire without the consent of the official of the Fire Department in
command.
(`67 Code, § 9-1-1) (Am. Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.03 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLE.
   Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, roller skates or
any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself or herself to any moving
vehicle upon any roadway.
(`67 Code, § 9-1-2) (Am. Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.04 DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS, NEW PAVEMENT, PUBLIC LAWNS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area or
parkway except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
(`67 Code, § 9-1-3)
   (B)   No person shall ride or drive any animal or vehicle over or across any
newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier or
sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or
marking, or when a sign is in place stating that the street or any portion
thereof is closed.
(`67 Code, § 9-1-4)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to drive any
motorcycle, automobile or truck upon the lawn or any area planted with grass in
any park owned by the city.
(`67 Code, § 9-1-7) (Ord. 234, passed 9-10-57; Am. Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-
09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.05 CROSSWALKS.
   The Council may establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at
intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the
surface of the roadway as follows:
   Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at intersections within the
central traffic district and at such other intersections within or outside the
district where the Council determines that there is a particular hazard to
pedestrians crossing the roadway.
(`67 Code, § 9-1-5) (Am. Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-09)
§ 70.06 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   No pedestrian shall cross at a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb, or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a marked crosswalk.
(`67 Code, § 9-1-6) (Ord. 41, passed 5-21-37; Am. Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-
09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.07 SPEED LIMITS.
   The City Council determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
survey that a speed greater than 25 miles per hour would facilitate the orderly
movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe upon the
hereinafter described streets and it is hereby determined and declared that the
prima facie speed limit hereinafter set forth is found most appropriate to
facilitate the orderly movement of traffic on the streets and that the speed is
reasonable and safe. The provisions of this section shall not apply in respect
to any 25 mile per hour prima speed limit which is applicable when passing a
school building or the grounds thereof.
(`67 Code, § 9-5-1) (Am. Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-09) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Speed limits specified, see
Chapter 73, Schedule I
§ 70.08 WEIGHT LIMITS.
   The use of any streets not specifically listed in
Chapter 73, Schedule II of the city code is prohibited by any vehicle exceeding
a maximum gross weight limit of five tons, excepting any vehicle which is
subject to the provisions of Cal. Pub. Util. Code §§ 1031 to 1036, inclusive,
and excepting any commercial vehicle coming from an unrestricted street having
ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets where
necessary for the purpose of making pickups and deliveries of goods, wares and
merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted
streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and
bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or
structure upon each restricted street far which a building permit has
previously been obtained therefor.
(`67 Code, § 9-4-1) (Ord. 87-04, passed 2-23-87; Am. Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-
26-09) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Truck routes, see
Chapter 73, Schedule II
CHAPTER 71: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
   
71.01   Application; compliance required
   
71.02   Director of Public Works as Street Commissioner
   
71.03   Parallel parking
   
71.04   Angle parking
   
71.05   Stopping, standing and parking prohibited
   
71.06   Intersections and crosswalks
   
71.07   Prohibited and limited parking
   
71.08   Curb marking
   
71.09   Loading zones
   
71.10   Standing in alleys
   
71.11   Truck or trailer parking
   
71.12   Unlawful parking by peddlers and vendors
   
71.13   Temporary parking signs
   
71.14   Parking on private property
   
71.15   Parking on city-owned parking area
   
71.16   Parking of recreation vehicles
   
71.17   Washing vehicles in streets
   
71.18   Repairs and maintenance of vehicles in streets
   
71.19   Repair of vehicles and boats in residential districts
§ 71.01 APPLICATION; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or
parking of a vehicle shall apply at the times or at those times herein
specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or
parking shall not relieve any person from the city to observe other and more
restrictive provisions hereof or of law prohibiting or limiting the standing or
parking of vehicle in specified places or at specified times.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-4) (Ord. 41, passed 5-21-37)
§ 71.02 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS AS STREET COMMISSIONER.
   The Director of Public Works of the city is hereby designated the Street
Commissioner for the purposes of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-20) (Ord. 79-4, passed 5-29-79)
§ 71.03 PARALLEL PARKING.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of traffic and with the
right hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb line or edge of
the curb indicated by such marks or signs.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-1) (Ord. 41, passed 5-21-37)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.04 ANGLE PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon those streets which have
been marked or signed by order of the Council for angle parking. A vehicle
shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or signs.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-2)
   (B)   The Council shall determine those streets upon which angle parking
shall be permitted (other than state highways where such parking is prohibited
by the State Vehicle Code) and the Street Commissioner shall indicate such
places by placing white lines upon the surface of the roadway indicating the
angle at which parking is permitted.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-3)
(Ord. 41, passed 5-21-37)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.05 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of the following
places:
   (A)   Within any tunnel or upon any bridge, viaduct or approach thereto.
   (B)   Within any parkway.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-5) (Ord. 41, passed 5-21-37)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.06 INTERSECTIONS AND CROSSWALKS.
   The Street Commissioner shall appropriately sign or mark the following
places and when signs or markings are in place, no person shall stop, stand, or
park a vehicle in any of those places:
   (A)   At any place within 30 feet of an intersection other than as
hereinbefore mentioned.
   (B)   Within 15 feet of the approach to the nearest line of a crosswalk.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-6) (Ord. 41, passed 5-21-37)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.07 PROHIBITED AND LIMITED PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall stop, park or leave standing, any vehicle on any
street or highway in the city for 72 or more consecutive hours. Such vehicle,
cited or not, must be reloccated at minimum of 755 linear feet to avoid
violation of California Vehicle Code Section 22651 (k) or this section. Any
vehicle parked or left standing in excess of 72 consecutive hours in violation
of this section may be cited or removed therefrom by a Neighborhood Improvement
Officer or any regularly employed and salaried or contract officer of the
Riverbank Police Services Division of the city. Such officer may move, remove
and store the vehicle.
(Am. Ord. 2024-001, passed 1-9-24)
   (B)   If the vehicle is moved to another location where it is not readily
visible from its formerly parked location or if it is stored, the officer
causing such movement or storage of the vehicle shall immediately, by the most
expeditious means, notify the owner of its location. If for any reason the
owner of the vehicle cannot be so notified the person causing the vehicle to be
moved or stored shall immediately, by the most expeditious means, send a letter
by certified mail to the last known registered owner and legal owner of the
vehicle.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-12) (Ord. 70-19, passed 1-25-71)
   (C)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle upon any street in
the city when signs authorized by the City Council are in place giving notice
that parking thereon is prohibited.
   (D)   When signs authorized by the City Council are in place giving notice
thereof, no person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle upon any street
within the city between the hours designated by the sign on any day except
Sunday for a period of time longer than so designated by said sign. Each period
of over-parking for more than the period stated on the time limit sign shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 85-14, passed 11-12-85)
   (E)   No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday upon any paved street or part of a paved
street inside the area bounded by and including Second, Third and Fourth
Streets south of Atchison to Sierra, and Santa Fe Street between Second and
Fourth Streets.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-13) (Ord. 90-13, passed 7-9-90)
   (F)   No vehicle shall be parked for a longer period of time than one hour
on any street or portion of street on which parking signs are erected informing
the public that parking is limited thereon to a period of one hour. No vehicle
shall be parked for a longer period of time than two hours on any street or
portion of street on which parking signs are erected informing the public that
parking is limited thereon to a period of two hours.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-8) (Ord. 245, passed 7-27-59)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   For provisions concerning the disposition of abandoned vehicles, see
Chapter 90
§ 71.08 CURB MARKING.
   (A)   Red, yellow, and green markings.
      (1)   The Street Commissioner is hereby authorized, subject to the
provisions and limitations of this title to place, and when required herein
shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing
regulations and the curb marking shall have the meaning as herein set forth.
         (a)   Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time;
except that a bus stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.
         (b)   Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time
between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday for any purpose other
than the loading or unloading of materials, provided that the loading or
unloading of materials shall not consume more than 30 minutes.
(Ord. 41, passed 5-21-37)
         (c)   Green shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for more than
ten minutes at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any day except
Sunday.
(Ord. 102, passed 9-11-51)
      (2)   When the Street Commissioner, as authorized under this title, has
caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand, or park a
vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 41, passed 5-21-37)
(`67 Code, § 9-2-7)
   (B)   Blue curb parking.
      (1)   Use of blue curb spaces. Persons using “blue curb” parking spaces
shall comply with the following:
         (a)   No person shall park or stand any vehicle in a disabled persons
parking zone (blue curb) unless the vehicle bears a special license or displays
a special placard issued under the provisions of Cal. Veh. Code § 9105 or §
22511.5.
         (b)   Parking zones for the physically handicapped are subject to any
temporary parking prohibitions established by the city.
      (2)   On-street parking. The City Council, by resolution, shall designate
special “blue curb” parking spaces for the purpose of providing on-street
parking and off-street parking in publicly owned or controlled parking
facilities for exclusive use by physically handicapped persons.
      (3)   Off-street/privately financed facilities. The city hereby declares
that there are privately owned and operated parking facilities which may
reserve parking stalls for exclusive use by physically handicapped persons.
      (4)   Identification.
         (a)   On-street blue curb spaces. Blue curb spaces shall be indicated
by blue paint on the curb edge of the paved portion of the street. For further
identification, the international symbol of access may be painted on the blue
curb in white followed by the word “ONLY”.
         (b)   Off-street/publicly owned facilities. Designation of blue curbs
parking stalls in publicly financed off-street parking facilities shall be made
by posting immediately adjacent to, and visible from same, a sign consisting of
the international symbol of access.
         (c)   Off-street/privately financed facilities. Designation of “blue
curb” parking stalls in privately financed off-street parking facilities shall
be made by posting immediately adjacent to, and visible from same a sign
consisting of the international symbol of access.
(Ord. 77-25, passed 10-25-77)
(`67 Code, § 9-2-19)
§ 71.09 LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   The Street Commissioner shall when authorized by resolution of the
Council mark loading zones.
   (B)   Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of
loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and
shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more
than 30 minutes.
   (C)   The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial
deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and
United States mail.
   (D)   Within the total time limits above specified the provisions of this
section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading
or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-9)
   (E)   When authorized signs or marks are in place giving notice thereof no
person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose other than loading
or unloading materials for such time as is permitted herein, in any of the
following places: In any yellow loading zone.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-11)
(Ord. 41, passed 5-21-37)
§ 71.10 STANDING IN ALLEYS.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose other than
the loading or unloading of persons or material in any alley.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-10) (Ord. 41, passed 5-21-37)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.11 TRUCK OR TRAILER PARKING.
   No person shall park a truck and trailer, semi-trailer or commercial vehicle
of any type having an over-all length in excess of 22 feet, or a maximum gross
weight limit in excess of five tons, in the parking area of any city street on
which angle parking is required, or in the parking area of any city street not
designated as a truck route, provided, however, that such vehicles may park
temporarily for pickups and deliveries as permitted by §
70.08 of this code, but in no event shall parking be allowed for more than two
hours.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-14) (Ord. 87-21, passed 1-11-88)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.12 UNLAWFUL PARKING BY PEDDLERS AND VENDORS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or
park any vehicle, wagon or push-cart from which goods, wares, merchandise,
fruits, vegetables or food stuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for
sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating cart or vehicle, on
any portion of any street within this city, except that such vehicle, wagon,
push-carts may stand or park at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a
period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. The provisions of
this division shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of
or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of business
or distribution.
   (B)   No person shall park or stand on any city park or street, any lunch
wagon, eating cart or vehicle or push-cart, from which food and beverages are
sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so from
the City Manager which shall designate the specific location in which such cart
shall stand. Applicants may appeal the City Manager's decision to the City
Council.
   (C)   No person shall park or stand any vehicle, or wagon used or intended
to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while
awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written
permit to do so from the Council which shall designate the specific location
where such vehicle shall stand.
(Ord. 74-20, passed 9-9-74)
   (D)   The City Council may, by resolution, restrict the parking of any
vehicle, bus, boat, camper, trailer, motorhome or motorcycle upon any street or
any portion of any street in the city advertising or displaying it for sale,
upon a finding that the parking of any such vehicle, bus, boat, camper,
trailer, motorhome or motorcycle would be hazardous to the health and safety of
the public. Notice of intent to adopt such a resolution shall be given by
publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation at least five days prior
to adoption.
(Ord. 92-13, passed 10-12-92)
   (E)   Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section
and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person
shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon or pushcart on any location other than
as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit
is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the
provisions of this Section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the
Council upon the filing of the record of such conviction with the Council and
no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have
elapsed from the date of such revocation.
(Ord. 41, passed 5-21-37)
(`67 Code, § 9-2-15) (Am. Ord. 2003-016, passed 12-8-03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.13 TEMPORARY PARKING SIGNS.
   (A)   Whenever the Sheriff's Commanding Officer determines that an emergency
traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private
assemblages, gatherings or functions or for other reasons, the Sheriff's
Commanding Officer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to
be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of
vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the Sheriff's Commanding
Officer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such
signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the
Sheriff's Commanding Officer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly
thereafter.
   (B)   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place
giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle
contrary to the direction and provisions of such signs.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-17) (Ord. 41, passed 5-21-37)
§ 71.14 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall park a vehicle on private property without the direct or
implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such property.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-21) (Ord. 82-6, passed 9-13-82)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.15 PARKING ON CITY-OWNED PARKING AREA.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicles other than one owned by
the city for any purpose in the city-owned parking area immediately behind the
City Hall and the Riverbank Police Services Division located at 6701 Third
Street, Riverbank, without the express written permission of the City Manager.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-23) (Ord. 85-02, passed 6-24-85)
§ 71.16 PARKING OF RECREATION VEHICLES.
   (A)   The City Council finds and determines that the unrestricted parking of
recreation vehicles on public streets in the city leads to their unlawful
occupation as dwelling units, congests traffic and constitute a hazard to the
public safety in that recreation vehicles restrict visibility.
   (B)   It is unlawful to park recreation vehicles on any public street in the
city for more than 72 hours, within any period of seven consecutive days,
except that non residents of the city may park, upon the issuance of a permit
to do so, for a period not to exceed seven consecutive days, while the owner or
operator of the recreation vehicle is a guest of any residence adjoining that
portion of the street upon which the recreation vehicle is parked. In either
circumstance the recreation vehicle is to remain unoccupied. Permits under this
section may be issued by any regularly salaried member of the Riverbank Police
Services Division. A visitor permit will only be issued twice a calendar year
for the same owner or recreational vehicle. In extenuating circumstances, such
as health reasons requiring the visitor’s stay to be extended several days, the
party must receive approval by the Chief of Police Services. There is a $25
administrative fee for the issuance of said permit.
   (C)   Recreation vehicles, for the purpose of this section, shall include
any motor home, which exceeds 20 feet in overall length, travel trailers, fifth
wheel trailers, trailers with boats and house boats.
   (D)   It shall also be unlawful to park any recreation vehicle in a diagonal
parking space so that the recreation vehicle protrudes more than 20 feet into
the street as measured perpendicularly from the curb.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-22) (Ord. 85-02, passed 6-24-85; Am. Ord. 2003-017, passed 12-
8-03; Am. Ord. 2005-003, passed 2-14-05)
§ 71.17 WASHING VEHICLES IN STREETS.
   No person shall dust, wipe, wash or otherwise clean, use or employ any
method of dusting, wiping, washing or otherwise cleaning any vehicle or portion
thereof while on any street unless such vehicle is owned by or is under the
direct control or supervision of the person doing any of the acts herein
enumerated.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-16) (Ord. 41, passed 5-21-37)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.18 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES IN STREETS.
   (A)   No person shall add oil to or change the oil of a motor vehicle while
such motor vehicle is parked or standing on any street.
   (B)   No person shall repair any motor vehicle while such motor vehicle is
parked or standing on any street, excepting as follows:
      (1)   Repairs and maintenance work may be done if the required work can
be completed within two hours from the time the work commences, and
      (2)   Such repairs are not likely to result in oil or gas being spilled
on the street.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-18) (Ord. 76-7, passed 6-14-76)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.19 REPAIR OF VEHICLES AND BOATS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Findings and determinations; definitions.
      (1)   The City Council has determined that the repairing and/or
dismantling of vehicles and boats in public view in residential districts has a
negative impact on the liveability and appearance of the city, on the
availability of driveways for parking, on property values and can pose safety
and health hazards to children and adults. The Council hereby makes the finding
that the public health, safety and welfare require the prohibition of repairing
or dismantling of vehicles or boats in public view in residential districts,
except under certain circumstances.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following words shall have the
meaning set forth herein:
      BOAT. Includes every description of watercraft used or capable of being
used as a means of transportation on water.
      IMMEDIATE FAMILY. Consists of parents, grandparents, spouse and children
related by blood, marriage or adoption.
      MAJOR REPAIR. Includes pulling and dismantling engines, repair or
replacement of transmissions, axles, water pumps, alternators, brakes, shocks
and similar work as well as vehicle body, panel repair and any hull or cabin
repair to a boat.
      OPERATIONAL VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is currently capable of being
propelled by its own engine.
      OWNER OF VEHICLE OR BOAT. The last registered owner and legal owner of
record.
      PROPERTY, REAL PROPERTY, PRIVATE PROPERTY. Shall not include sidewalks or
unpaved areas.
      REGISTRATION. A current valid state registration for a vehicle conforming
to Cal. Veh. Code §§ 4000 or 9840 et seq., for boats.
      RESIDENT. The owner or lessee of real property.
      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. Those areas of the city zoned for residential use,
whether for single or multiple family dwellings.
      ROUTINE MAINTENANCE. Shall be limited to changing oil, tires, air
filters, spark plugs and similar work commonly referred to as a tune-up. Except
as listed, the removal or replacement of mechanical or body parts of a vehicle
or boat constitute major repair.
      VEHICLE. A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved
or drawn upon a highway or street, except a device moved exclusively by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   (B)   Routine maintenance; exception. Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, no person shall be authorized to perform routine maintenance in public
view in a residential district on a vehicle or boat, unless as follows:
      (1)   Such person is the lawful resident of the property where the
routine maintenance is being performed; and
      (2)   Such vehicle or boat is registered to the lawful resident of the
property or a member of the immediate family; or
      (3)   Such person is licensed by the city to perform routine maintenance
at the residence of another; and
      (4)   Proof of registration or proof of immediate family relation is
provided upon request.
   (C)   Major repairs; exception. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, no person shall be authorized to perform major repairs in public view
in a residential district unless:
      (1)   Such person is the lawful resident of the property where the major
repair is being performed; and
      (2)   In a fully-enclosed garage or building, or behind a six-foot fence
or gate capable of screening the boat or vehicle and parts thereof from public
view.
      (3)   The door of such garage or building or the fence gate is closed
when repairs are not in progress.
   (D)   Major repairs; carport. It is unlawful to perform major repairs in a
residential district on any vehicle or boat within a carport which is exposed
to public view.
   (E)   Major repairs; limits. It shall be unlawful for more than two boats or
vehicles to be under major repair or stored at any one time, in a residential
district, except if located within a fully enclosed garage or building.
   (F)   Spray painting prohibited. It shall be unlawful to spray paint a
vehicle or boat, panels or parts thereof in a residential district.
   (G)   Current registration requirements. All vehicles or boats in public
view in a residential district, shall display current registration and shall be
operational. Proof of operational status and current registration shall be
provided upon request.
   (H)   Compensation for major repair and routine maintenance. No monies or
anything of monetary value may be charged, exchanged, given or received for
major repairs or routine maintenance performed in any residential district
except for those persons licensed by the city to perform routine maintenance at
the residence of another.
   (I)   Nighttime routine maintenance and major repair work. Routine
maintenance or major repairs in residential districts shall take place between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Sundays and holidays.
   (J)   Testing of vehicle or boat engines. Testing of a vehicle or boat
engine in residential districts shall take place between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:
00 p.m. Sundays and holidays.
   (K)   Routine maintenance time limit. Routine maintenance in a residential
district shall be completed within a 72 consecutive hour period after the
maintenance has begun, and shall not exceed this time period.
   (L)   Clean-up. Upon completion of any work authorized by this section, all
debris, oil, grease, gasoline, rags, equipment, parts or materials shall be
disposed of in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property. Hazardous materials shall be disposed of in a
lawful manner and in accordance with state, county and city regulations.
   (M)   Property maintenance; responsibility.
      (1)   Owner. Every owner of real property shall maintain such property in
a lawful manner consistent with the provisions of this section. In the case of
leased or rented single-family dwelling or apartment or multiple family
dwelling, the property owner shall ensure that every occupant properly
maintains the property. Such owner remains liable for violations thereof
regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding such
property.
      (2)   Occupant or lessee. Every occupant, lessee or holder of any
interest in property, other than as owner thereof, is required to maintain such
property in the same manner as is required of the owner thereof, and the duty
imposed by this section on the owner thereof shall in no instance relieve those
persons herein referred to from similar duty.
(`67 Code, § 9-2-24) (Ord. 92-10, passed 9-14-92)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 72: BICYCLES
Section
   
72.01   License required
   
72.02   Application
   
72.03   Metallic license plate
   
72.04   License fee
   
72.05   Requirements for second hand bicycle dealers
   
72.06   Duty when selling or transferring ownership
   
72.07   Mutilating or destroying license plate
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled
wholly or in part by muscular power upon any of the streets, alleys or public
highway of the city, without first obtaining from the Riverbank Police Services
Division a license therefor.
(`67 Code, § 9-3-1) (Ord. 108, passed 11-10-52)
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.02 APPLICATION.
   The Riverbank Police Services Division is hereby authorized and directed to
issue upon written application, bicycle licenses which shall be effective from
January 1, 1980 and effective thereafter. The licenses shall be issued for a
period of three years and the licenses must be procured on or before February 1
after each three-year period. The licenses when issued, shall entitle the
licensee to operate such bicycle for which said license has been issued, upon
all the streets, alleys and highways, exclusive of the sidewalks thereof.
(`67 Code, § 9-3-2)
§ 72.03 METALLIC LICENSE PLATE.
   The city shall provide each year metallic license plates and seals, together
with registration cards. The metallic license plates and seals shall have
printed on them consecutive numbers assigned by the State Department of Motor
Vehicles. The license plates shall be attached to the frame of each bicycle
licensed. It shall be the duty of the Riverbank Police Services Division to
attach the license plate to each bicycle licensed, and to issue a corresponding
registration card to the licensee upon the payment of the license fee herein
provided for. The metallic license plate shall remain attached during the
existence of the license. The Riverbank Police Services Division shall also
keep a record of the date of issue of each license, to whom issued, and the
number thereof.
(`67 Code, § 9-3-3) (Ord. 80-2, passed 2-11-80)
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.04 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The annual license fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be as
follows:
      (1)   For each new bicycle license and registration certificate, the sum
shall not exceed $2 per year or any portion thereof;
      (2)   For each transfer of registration certificate, the sum shall not
exceed $1;
      (3)   For each replacement of a bicycle license or registration
certificate, the sum shall not exceed $1; and
      (4)   For each bicycle license renewal, the sum shall not exceed $1 per
year.
   (B)   All license fees collected under this chapter shall be paid into the
general fund of the city. The license fees may be changed from time to time by
resolution of the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Veh.
Code § 39004.
(`67 Code, § 9-3-7) (Ord. 80-2, passed 2-11-80)
§ 72.05 REQUIREMENTS FOR SECOND HAND BICYCLE DEALERS.
   (A)   All persons engaged in the business of buying second-hand bicycles in
the city are hereby required to make a weekly report to the Riverbank Police
Services Division, giving the name and address of the person from whom each
bicycle is purchased, the description of each bicycle purchased, the frame
number thereof, and the number of the metallic license plate found thereon, if
any.
   (B)   All persons engaged in the business of selling new or second hand
bicycles are hereby required to make a weekly report to the Riverbank Police
Services Division, giving a list of all sales made by such dealers, which list
shall include the name and address of each person to whom sold, the kind of
bicycle sold, together with a description and frame number thereof, and the
number of the metallic license plate attached thereto, if any.
(`67 Code, § 9-3-4)
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.06 DUTY WHEN SELLING OR TRANSFERRING OWNERSHIP.
   It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any
bicycle to report such sale or transfer by returning to the Riverbank Police
Services Division the registration card issued to such person as licensee
thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom said bicycle
was sold or transferred, and such report shall be made within ten days of the
date of the sale or transfer. It shall be the duty of the purchaser or
transferee of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration therefor
within ten days of the sale or transfer.
(`67 Code, § 9-3-5)
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.07 MUTILATING OR DESTROYING LICENSE PLATE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to
this chapter. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy,
mutilate or alter any license plate, seal, or registration card during the time
in which such license plate seal or registration card is operative, provided,
however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the Riverbank Police
Services Division from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no
serial number can be found, or on which said number is illegible or
insufficient for identification purposes.
(`67 Code, § 9-3-6) (Ord. 108, passed 11-10-52)
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not more than $10.
(`67 Code, § 9-3-8) (Ord. 108, passed 11-10-52)
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
      
II.   Truck routes
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   The speed limit of 25 mph will apply to all residential roadways within the
city except as noted below. The following declared prima facie speed limits
shall be applicable to the following streets:
   (A)   30 miles per hour:
Street Location Speed Limit (m.p.h.)
Street            Location                                Speed Limit (m.p.h.)
Santa Fe Street   Between 7th Street and Claus Road (east 30
                  and westbound lanes)
                  Between Patterson Road and the northern
First Street      city limits (San Joaquin County line)   30
                  (north and southbound lanes)
California Street Between Claus Road and Snedigar Road    30
                  (east and westbound lanes
                  Between the southern city limit and
Terminal Avenue   Patterson Road (north and southbound    30
                  lanes
Townsend Avenue   Between Terminal Avenue and Claus Road  30
                  (east and westbound lanes)
Antique Rose Way  Between Crawford Road and Squire Wells  30
                  Way (north and southbound lanes)
Squire Wells Way  Between Morrill Road and Claribel Road  30
                  (north and southbound lanes)
 
   (B)   35 miles per hour:
 
Street         Location                                 Speed Limit (m.p.h.)
Morrill Road   Between Oakdale Road and Roselle Avenue  35
               (east and westbound lanes)
Patterson Road Between Callander (SR-108) and Central   35
               Avenue (east and westbound lanes)
Snedigar Road  Between California Avenue and Santa Fe   35
               Street (north and southbound lanes)
Crawford Road  Between Oakdale Road and Roselle Avenue  35
               (east and westbound lanes)
 
   (C)   40 miles per hour:
 
Street          Location                                   Speed Limit (m.p.h.)
Santa Fe Street Between Claus Road and Snedigar Road (east 40
                and westbound lanes
Claus Road      Between California street and SR-108       40
                (north and southbound lanes)
Roselle Avenue  Between Claribel Road and Patterson Road   40
                (north and southbound lanes)
 
   (D)   45 miles per hour:
 
Street       Location                                     Speed Limit (m.p.h.)
Oakdale Road Between Morrill Road and Patterson Road (SR- 45
             108) (north and southbound lanes)
 
   (E)   50 miles per hour:
 
Street        Location                                     Speed Limit (m.p.h.)
Claribel Road Between Oakdale Road and the east city       50
              limits (MID Main) (east and westbound lanes)
Oakdale Road  Between Claribel Road and Morrill Road       50
              (north and southbound lanes)
Claus Road    Between Claribel Road and California Street  50
              (north and southbound lanes)
 
(Ord. 2016-007, passed 11-8-16)
SCHEDULE II. TRUCK ROUTES.
   The following streets are designated as truck routes, without restrictions
as to weight limits:
   Atchison Street (SR-108)
   Callander Avenue (SR-108)
   Claus Road
   First Street
   Oakdale Road south from Patterson Road (SR-108) to Claribel Road
   Patterson Road
   Railroad Avenue
   Roselle Avenue
   Santa Fe Street, from Callander Avenue (SR-108) 400 feet east
   Santa Fe Street between First Street and Third Street
   Sierra Street, from Railroad Avenue to a point 200 feet west of Railroad
Avenue
   Sierra Street between Third Street and First Street
   Stanislaus Street, from Callander Avenue (SR-108) 400 feet east
   Stanislaus Street between Third Street and First Street
   Talbot Avenue
   Terminal Avenue 600 feet south from Townsend Avenue
   Third Street, from Atchison Street to Patterson Road
(`67 Code, §§ 9-4-2, 9-4-3) (Ord. 80-11, passed 9-22-80; Am. Ord. 87-21, passed
1-11-88; Am. Ord. 88-11, passed 9-26-88; Am. Ord. 98-07, passed 1-11-99; Am.
Ord. 2005-002, passed 1-24-05)
CHAPTER 74: USE OF ENGINE OR TRANSMISSION BRAKING DEVICES
Section
   
74.01   Use of engine or transmission braking devices
§ 74.01 USE OF ENGINE OR TRANSMISSION BRAKING DEVICES.
   (A)   Findings. The City Council finds that the use of engine or
transmission braking devices or methods (aka "jake braking" or "dynamic
braking") within the city limits creates unusual and excessive noise that
unreasonably disturbs and annoys residents. The prohibition of such devices and
methods is necessary to protect the health, safety, and public welfare.
   (B)   Prohibition. No person may slow a vehicle by a device, method, or
practice known as engine or transmission braking, also referred to as "jake
braking" or "dynamic braking", whereby rapid downshifting of a vehicle's engine
or a compression release device is used in lieu of applying a vehicle's wheel
brakes, causing loud noises to emit from the vehicle's engine and exhaust
system. Such braking by any motor vehicle on any public highway, street,
parking lot, or alley within the city is declared to be a public nuisance and
is prohibited.
   (C)   Emergency vehicles. The foregoing provision does not apply to
emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 2002-004, passed 6-10-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
75.01   Authority to install traffic-control devices
   
75.02   When traffic-control devices required for enforcement purposes
   
75.03   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
75.04   Railway gates
§ 75.01 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The Director shall have the power and duty to place and maintain, or
cause to be placed and maintained, official traffic-control devices when and as
required under the traffic laws of the city to make effective the provisions of
the laws; provided, however, that such traffic-control devices shall comply
with the uniform standards and specifications promulgated pursuant to Cal. Veh.
Code §§ 21400 and 21401.
   (B)   Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any law or
provisions thereof, that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to
the public of the application of such law, the Director is authorized to
install or cause to be installed the necessary devices, subject to any
limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.
   (C)   The Director may also place and maintain, or cause to be placed and
maintained, such additional traffic-control devices as he or she may deem
necessary to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he or she shall
make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles
and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations
and rules as may be set forth in the traffic laws of the city, or as may be
determined by ordinance or resolution of the Council.
(Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-09)
§ 75.02 WHEN TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES.
   No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this chapter for which signs are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate signs
are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person, giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws.
(Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-09)
§ 75.03 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instruction of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic
laws of the city unless otherwise directed by a person authorized to direct
traffic, subject to the exceptions granted by the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls.
(Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-09)
§ 75.04 RAILWAY GATES.
   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate
or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or being
opened or closed.
(Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-09) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 76: TURNING MOVEMENTS
Section
   
76.01   Obedience to no-turn signs
§ 76.01 OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn, left
turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of any such sign.
(Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-09)
CHAPTER 77: ONE-WAY ALLEYS
Section
   
77.01   Traffic control through certain alleys
§ 77.01 TRAFFIC CONTROL THROUGH CERTAIN ALLEYS.
   Whenever any resolution of this city designates an alley or street as one-
way, it is unlawful to drive any vehicle through the alley or street except in
the direction authorized, or to stop or park any vehicle in any such alley
except on the side thereof designated by the Director and as near the property
line as is practicable. The Director shall cause signs to be erected on one-way
alleys indicating the side or portion thereof upon which loading or unloading
is authorized.
(Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-09)
CHAPTER 78: RIGHT-OF-WAY
Section
   
78.01   Stop signs
   
78.02   Yield right-of-way signs
§ 78.01 STOP SIGNS.
   The Director is authorized to erect and maintain stop signs at those
locations where he or she deems such controls to be necessary in order to
protect the public safety. When signs are erected giving notice thereof,
drivers of vehicles shall stop at the entrance or entrances to such
intersections.
(Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-09)
§ 78.02 YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
   Pursuant to the authority contained in Cal. Veh. Code § 21356, the Director
is authorized to erect or cause to be erected yield right-of-way signs at one
or more approaches to an intersection of streets and highways in the city which
are not through streets.
(Ord. 2009-001, passed 5-26-09)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   ABANDONED AND WRECKED VEHICLES
         
91.   ANIMAL CONTROL
         
92.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
         
93.   NOISE
         
94.   PARK REGULATIONS
         
95.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
         
96.   TREES
         
97.   WEED CONTROL; SANITARY REGULATIONS
         
98.   NUISANCE ABATEMENT
         
99.   ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED AND WRECKED VEHICLES
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Findings
   
90.03   Violations
   
90.04   Enforcement by Sheriff's Department Commander
   
90.05   Authority for removal of vehicles
   
90.06   Right of entry on private property
   
90.07   Abandoned vehicles on public or private property
   
90.08   Storage of vehicle; mileage
   
90.09   Notice and hearing rights
   
90.10   Disposition of abandoned vehicles
   
90.11   Prohibition against reconstruction
   
90.12   Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles, California Highway Patrol
   
90.13   City administrative costs fixed by resolution
   
90.14   Collection of costs as tax assessment in cases of nonpayment
   
90.15   Chapter not exclusive
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Includes the following:
      (1)    ABANDONED VEHICLE. A vehicle is “abandoned” if it is left on a
highway, public property, or private property in such inoperable or neglected
condition that the owner's intention to relinquish all further rights or
interests in it may be reasonably concluded. In reference to highways,
“abandonment” is presumed to have occurred if a vehicle is left 72 hours or
more on the highway, or is parked, resting or otherwise immobilized on any
highway or public right-of-way; and lacks an engine, transmission, wheels,
tires, doors, windshield, or any other part or equipment necessary to operate
safely on the highway. Such vehicles are presumed to be a hazard to public
health, safety, and welfare and may be removed immediately upon discovery by a
peace officer or other designated employee.
      (2)    DISMANTLED VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is partially or wholly
disassembled.
      (3)    INOPERATIVE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle that cannot be moved under
its own power.
      (4)    PUBLIC NUISANCE VEHICLE. Any vehicle or parts thereof, that is
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative, that is left that creates a
condition tending to reduce the value of private property, promotes blight and
deterioration, invites plundering, creates fire hazards, constitutes an
attractive nuisance endangering the health and safety of minors, harbors
rodents and insects, or jeopardizes health, safety and general welfare.
      (5)    WRECKED VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is damaged to such an extent
that it cannot be operated upon the highway. A vehicle which has been wrecked
in a traffic accident, and which has been removed from the roadway to a storage
facility, but which has not been claimed by its owner will not be considered an
abandoned vehicle.
   EMPLOYEE. A city employee designated by the Director of Public Works.
   HIGHWAY. A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. Highway includes a
street, and all or any part of the entire width of the right-of-way of said
highway.
   PEACE OFFICER. An individual as defined in Cal. Penal Code §§ 830 et seq.
   VEHICLE. A device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
§ 90.02 FINDINGS.
   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the state under Cal. Veh. Code § 22660 to remove
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts as public
nuisances, the City Council makes the following findings and declaration:
   The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicles or parts, on private or public property, including
highways, creates a condition tending to reduce the value of private property,
promotes blight and deterioration, invites plundering, created fire hazards,
constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety
of minors, created a harborage for rodents and insects and is injurious to the
health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts, on private or public
property, including highways is declared to constitute a nuisance which may be
abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
§ 90.03 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon a vehicle upon any highway. Any violation of
this section constitutes an infraction.
   (B)   Every person who parks or leaves a vehicle on a highway for 72
consecutive hours or more is guilty of an infraction.
   (C)   No person shall abandon a vehicle upon public or private property
without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful
possession or control of the property. Any violation of this section
constitutes an infraction.
   (D)   A person convicted of a violation of this section shall pay a penalty
set forth in
§ 10.99 of the City Code, and in addition, such person shall provide proof that
the costs of removal and disposition of the vehicle have been paid. No part of
any fine imposed shall be suspended. The fine may be paid in installments if
the court determines that the defendant is unable to pay the entire amount in
one payment.
   (E)   Proof that the costs of removal and disposition of the vehicle have
been paid shall not be required if proof is provided to the court that the
vehicle was stolen prior to abandonment. That proof may consist of a police
report or other evidence acceptable to the court.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22523 and 22651(k)
§ 90.04 ENFORCEMENT BY SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT COMMANDER.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or by law, the provisions of
this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Sheriff's Department
Commander or employees designated in writing by the Sheriff's Department
Commander.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
§ 90.05 AUTHORITY FOR REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Any peace officer or any other employee, in the territorial limits in
which the officer or employee is authorized to act, who has reasonable grounds
to believe that a vehicle has been abandoned, may remove the vehicle from a
highway or from public or private property.
   (B)   Any peace officer may remove a vehicle located within the territorial
limits in which the officer or employee may act, when any vehicle is abandoned,
parked or left standing upon a highway for 72 or more consecutive hours.
   (C)   Motor vehicles which are abandoned, parked, resting, or otherwise
immobilized on any highway or public right-of-way and which lack an engine,
transmission, wheels, tires, doors, windshield, or any other part or equipment
necessary to operate safely on the highways of this state are a public nuisance
and may be removed immediately upon discovery by a peace officer or employee.
   (D)   Any person performing a franchise or contract awarded pursuant to Cal.
Veh. Code § 22710(a) may remove a vehicle from a highway or from public or
private property, after a determination by a peace officer or other employee
that the vehicle is abandoned, as determined pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code §
22523.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22651(k) and 22669
§ 90.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   In the enforcement of this chapter, the Sheriff's Department Commander
or his designated employees may enter upon private property for the purposes
specified in the ordinance to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, obtain
information as to the identity of a vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of
a vehicle or part thereof declared a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to
any person or persons for the abatement of abandoned vehicles, such person or
persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property to remove or cause
the removal of a vehicle or parts declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this
chapter.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Cal. Veh. Code § 22663
§ 90.07 ABANDONED VEHICLES ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Upon discovery on public or private property, excluding a highway, of
an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle which lacks an engine, transmission, wheels,
tires, doors, windshield, or other major part or equipment necessary to operate
safely on the highway, the Sheriff's Department Commander shall have the
authority to cause the abatement and removal of said vehicle in accordance with
the procedure prescribed in the section.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law or this chapter, not less than a
ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or part thereof as
a public nuisance shall be issued for a vehicle abandoned on public or private
property, excluding a highway, unless the property owner and the owner of the
vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest
in the vehicle or part thereof, except as provided in Cal. Veh. Code § 22661
(c).
   (C)   The 10-day notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle or part
thereof, when required by this chapter, shall contain a statement of hearing
rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and of the
owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner
that he (or she) may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a sworn
written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the
land, with his (or her) reason for such denial, in lieu of appearing. The
notice of intention to abate shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail,
to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to
the last registered and legal owners of record unless the vehicle is in such
condition that the identification numbers are not available to determine
ownership.
   (D)   A request for a hearing shall be made to the Sheriff's Department
Commander within ten days after the mailing of notice of intention to abate and
remove the vehicle or at the time of signing a release.
   (E)   Upon a request for hearing by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of
the land upon which such vehicle is located, a public hearing shall be held
before the Sheriff's Department Commander or his designee.
   (F)   If such a request is not received within such period, the appropriate
public body, agency, or officer shall have the authority to remove the vehicle.
   (G)   The Sheriff's Department Commander or his designee shall hear all
facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include
testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts, and the circumstances
concerning its location on the private property or public property. The
Sheriff's Department Commander or his designee shall not be limited by the
technical rules of evidence.
   (H)   The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located is authorized to
appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement denying
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his (or her)
reason for such denial.
   (I)   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the
land without the consent of the landowner and that he (or she) has not
subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the local authority shall not
assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property
on which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such cost from
the owner.
   (J)   If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a
sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle
on his (or her) land within such time period, this statement shall be construed
as request for hearing which does not require the presence of the owner
submitting such request.
   (K)   The Sheriff's Department Commander or his designee may impose such
conditions and take such other action as it seems appropriate under the
circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time
for removal of the vehicle, or parts, if, in its opinion, the circumstances
justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Sheriff's Department
Commander or his designee may find that a vehicle, or parts, has been
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property
and order the same be removed from the property as a public nuisance and
disposed of as provided in this chapter and determine the administrative costs
and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order
requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts and
correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available.
   (L)   Any interested party may appeal the decision of the Sheriff's
Department Commander or his designee by filing a written notice of appeal with
the City Council within five days after his decision. Such appeal shall be
heard by the City Council which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take
other action deemed appropriate. The clerk shall give written notice of the
time and place of the hearing to the appellant, to the owner of the land, and
the owner of the vehicle. In conducting the hearing, the City Council shall not
be limited by the technical rules of evidence.
   (M)   This section shall not apply to a vehicle or part thereof which is
completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not
visible from the street or other public or private property or a vehicle or
part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property
in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer, or junk yard.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance requirements, see Cal. Veh. Code § 22661
§ 90.08 STORAGE OF VEHICLE; MILEAGE.
   (A)   Whenever a peace officer or employee removes a vehicle from a highway,
or from public or private property, unless otherwise provided, he shall take
the vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage
designated by the county, where the vehicle shall be placed in storage.
   (B)   At the time of removal, the officer or employee shall determine the
amount of mileage on the vehicle.
   (C)   A vehicle placed in storage shall be released to the owner or person
in control of the vehicle only if the owner or person furnishes, to the law
enforcement agency or employee who placed the vehicle in storage, satisfactory
proof of current vehicle registration, the agency which caused the vehicle to
be stored may, in its discretion, issue a notice to appear for the registration
violation.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22850
§ 90.09 NOTICE AND HEARING RIGHTS.
   (A)   If a vehicle is determined to have a value not exceeding $100, a peace
officer or employee shall provide notice and the opportunity for a hearing in
accordance with Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22851.2 through 22851.12.
   (B)   Whenever a peace officer or employee directs the storage of any
vehicle, the vehicle's registered and legal owners of record, or their agents,
shall be given notice and the opportunity for post-storage hearing if required
by Cal. Veh. Code § 22852.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
§ 90.10 DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   Vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to scrap yard,
automobile dismantler's yard, or other suitable site.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Cal. Veh. Code § 22662
§ 90.11 PROHIBITION AGAINST RECONSTRUCTION.
   After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not be reconstructed or be made
operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage
license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code
§ 5004, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
Statutory reference:
   Reconstruction prohibited, see Cal. Veh. Code § 22661(f)
§ 90.12 NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES, CALIFORNIA HIGHWAY PATROL.
   (A)   Notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles within five
days after the date of removal, identifying the vehicle or part thereof and any
evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, the
registration card, certificates of ownership, or license plates.
   (B)   An employee, other than a peace officer or employee designated to
remove vehicles pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 22669, may do so only after he or
she has mailed or personally delivered a written report identifying the vehicle
and its location to the Department of California Highway Patrol located nearest
to the vehicle.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
Statutory reference:
   Requirements, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22661(a), 22669
§ 90.13 CITY ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS FIXED BY RESOLUTION.
   The last registered owner of record is responsible for abandonment and is
thereby liable for the cost of removal and disposition of the vehicle. The City
Council, by resolution, shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to
be assessed as vehicle abatement administrative, hearing and appeal costs. The
cost in the resolution shall not include costs and expenses which are not
incurred by the city.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
§ 90.14 COLLECTION OF COSTS AS TAX ASSESSMENT IN CASES OF NONPAYMENT.
   If the administrative, hearing and appeal costs and the cost of removal
which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to
§ 90.13 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, or the final
disposition of an appeal therefrom, a statement of these charges shall be sent
to the owner by the county. If not paid, such costs shall be assessed against
the owner's parcel of land pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 25845 and shall be
transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the
same priority of other taxes.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
§ 90.15 CHAPTER NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicles. It shall supplement and be in addition to
the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances enacted by the city,
county, state or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 5-10-99)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
   
91.01   Animal Control Ordinance adopted by reference
   
91.02   Prohibition
   
91.03   Penalty
   
91.04   Authority to enforce
   
91.05   City parks
   
91.06   Amendments to the City of Oakdale animals and fowl ordinance
Cross-reference:
   Interference with police dogs, see §
130.04
§ 91.01 ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The City of Oakdale Animals and Fowl Ordinance, which is codified in Chapter
4, Animals and Fowl, of the City of Oakdale Municipal Code, is hereby
incorporated by reference and made a part of this code the same as if set forth
in full herein, subject to the amendments and modifications provided herein. A
copy of the full text of the ordinance is available at the Office of the City
Clerk.
(Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15)
§ 91.02 PROHIBITION.
   No person shall violate the City of Oakdale Animals and Fowl Ordinance, as
adopted and amended by this chapter while within the City of Riverbank. Any
violation of such ordinance will be a violation of this code.
(Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15)
§ 91.03 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by fines in an amount
established by the City of Oakdale. Such fines shall be imposed pursuant to the
procedures outlined in the City of Oakdale Animals and Fowl Ordinance.
(Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15)
§ 91.04 AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Services Commanding Officer as defined in
§
94.01 of the City Code of Riverbank, such deputies as he or she may appoint for
such purpose, any individual or company the city contracts with for such
services, or any agency designated to do so by a joint powers agreement entered
into by the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15)
§ 91.05 CITY PARKS.
   Any animals and fowl code violations of this chapter within a city park
shall be deemed a park violation pursuant to
Chapter 94 of the code and shall be enforceable pursuant to
Chapter 99 of the Municipal Code of Riverbank.
(Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15)
§ 91.06 AMENDMENTS TO THE CITY OF OAKDALE ANIMALS AND FOWL ORDINANCE.
   As it applies to the City of Riverbank, the following sections are added to
the City of Oakdale Animals and Fowl Ordinance:
   Section 4-19.1 Animal Wastes.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having charge, care,
control, or custody of any dog, cat or other animal to allow animal waste or
fecal matter produced by said animal to accumulate or remain on the ground or
about the premises or property for more than three days without said animal
waste or fecal matter being placed in an airtight bag or other container and
removed from the property and disposed of within seven days of it being
collected and contained.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, any person owning or having charge, care,
control, or custody of any dog, cat or other animal shall at all times prevent
urine and/or feces odors of said animal's waste from hindering, hampering,
impeding, interfering with, infringing upon, or detracting from another
person's enjoyment of their real or personal property.
   Section 4-19.2 Removal of Animal Defecation.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or being in charge, care,
control, or custody of dog, cat, or other animal to permit, either willfully or
through failure to exercise due care or control, such animal to defecate and to
allow the feces to remain upon a public park, sidewalk, roadway or any public
street, or on any property not owned or possessed by the owner or person in
charge, care, control, or custody of the animal. The person owning or in
charge, care, control, or custody of any animal shall immediately and securely
enclose all feces deposited by such animal in a bag, wrapper, or other
container, and dispose of it in a sanitary manner.
   (B)   Failure of any person owning or being in charge, care, control, or
custody of any dog, cat, or other animal to remove such feces immediately from
the above-described property shall constitute a violation of this section and
shall be punishable as an infraction.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to individuals with
disabilities who have the charge or control of a certified guide or assistance
dog.
   (D)   Violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a fine
as set forth by a resolution of the City of Oakdale for Section 4-19 of the
referenced ordinance. An administrative citation issued for a violation under
Chapter 94 for city parks of the code, shall be punishable as noted by that
chapter.
(Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15)
  CHAPTER 92: FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
Section
Fire Code Regulations
   
92.01   California fire code adopted by reference
Fire Protection District
   
92.10   City included in county fire protection district
Fireworks Sales and Discharge
   
92.20   Definitions
   
92.21   Purpose
   
92.22   Administration
   
92.23   Permitted types of fireworks
   
92.24   Permit required
   
92.25   Qualification for issuance of a permit
   
92.26   Application requirements
   
92.27   Time for filing
   
92.28   Issuance of permit; non-transferability; duration
   
92.29   Compliance with permit restrictions; city regulations
   
92.30   Prohibitions of use or display, discharge of fireworks
   
92.31   Fireworks stand specifications
   
92.32   Failure to comply
   
92.33   Appeal for denial of permit
Fireworks Regulations and Enforcement
   
92.40   Definitions
   
92.41   Purpose
   
92.42   Issuance of administrative citation
   
92.43   Administrative fines
   
92.44   Administrative appeal hearing
Smoking Restrictions
   
92.50   Smoking restrictions in city owned buildings
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of Uniform Fire Code, see §
150.11
FIRE CODE REGULATIONS
§ 92.01 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The City Council adopts the California Fire Code as declared in municipal
code Chapter 150: Building Regulations, Fire Code.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT
§ 92.10 CITY INCLUDED IN COUNTY FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT.
   In accordance with the Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 13950 et seq., the City
Council hereby declares and determines its intention and desire to have the
city’s entire territory and its established jurisdiction boundaries included
within the Stanislaus County Consolidated Fire Protection District, and become
a part thereof.
(`67 Code, § 8-1-1) (Ord. 35½, passed 5-1-31; Am. Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-
18)
FIREWORKS SALES AND DISCHARGE
§ 92.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY MANAGER. Shall mean the City Manager or designee.
   DANGEROUS FIREWORKS. Every fireworks article which does not bear the safe
and sane classification label and as further defined in Cal. Health & Safety
Code §§ 12505 and 12561.
   EXEMPT FIREWORKS. As defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 12508 means any
special item containing pyrotechnic compositions which the State Fire Marshal,
with the advice of the State Fire Advisory Board, has investigated and
determined to be limited to industrial, commercial, agricultural use or
religious ceremonies when authorized by a permit granted by the authority
having jurisdiction.
   FIREWORKS. Any device containing chemical elements and chemical compounds
that are capable of burning independently off of the oxygen of the atmosphere
and producing audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effects which are useful
as pyrotechnic devices for entertainment. The term includes, but is not limited
to, devices designated by the manufacturer as fireworks, torpedoes, skyrockets,
roman candles, rockets, Daygo bombs, sparklers, party poppers, paper caps,
chasers, fountains, smoke sparks, aerial bombs, and fireworks kits.
   FIREWORKS STAND. Any building, counter, or other structure of a temporary
nature used in the sale, offering for sale, or display for sale of safe or sane
fireworks.
   FIREWORKS WHOLESALER. Any person, other than an importer, exporter or
manufacturer selling directly to wholesalers, who sells fireworks to a retailer
or any other person for resale.
   PERMIT. A certificate issued by the city that allows a qualified applicant
to temporarily sell fireworks pursuant to the regulations set forth. A permit
does not confer to any property rights and the city at its sole discretion,
without notice or opportunity for a hearing, may revoke the permit.
   PERMITTEE. Any applicant that has met the eligibility requirements and has
been issued a permit for the sale of safe and sane fireworks, or a City Council
approved state licensed pyrotechnic operator as defined under Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 12578.
   PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR. The City Manager's designated department or division
staff member that is assigned the responsibilities to administer the fireworks
sales program.
   SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS. As defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 12529
and 12562 means any fireworks which do not come within the definition of
DANGEROUS FIREWORKS or EXEMPT FIREWORKS.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.21 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to restrict the sale and use of fireworks
or the public display of fireworks within the city for the health, safety, and
welfare of all persons and properties of the city.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.22 ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Manager shall designate the Program Administrator responsible for
the Temporary Sale of Safe and Sane Fireworks Permit Program. The City Manager
may adopt reasonable processes and procedures to implement this subchapter in a
manner consistent with any applicable rules and regulations set forth by
ordinance of the City Council. The City Manager reserves the right to
immediately revoke, without notice or hearing, the permit to sell fireworks
when it is determined that a state or local regulation, law, or requirement has
been violated or an immediate danger situation that arises; this action shall
be final.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.23 PERMITTED TYPES OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Fireworks labeled as SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS are permitted pursuant to
the provisions of this section.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to possess,
sell, store, use, display or offer or make available for sale or expose for
sale at retail, fireworks for use within the city that are not classified as
"safe and sane fireworks" including altered safe and sane fireworks, or other
combustible devices or explosive substance or any kind of fireworks by another
name.
   (C)   Public display by state licensed pyrotechnic operator. Notwithstanding
divisions (A) and (B) of this section, the City Council may for a one-time city
conducted special event or celebratory occasion, allow for the issuance of a
city fireworks permit for the public display of "dangerous fireworks" conducted
by a state licensed pyrotechnic operator, who shall meet all the state and
local regulations, laws, and requirements to ensure the safety and welfare of
all persons and properties.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.24 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in
the sale or distribution of fireworks within the city without first securing a
permit from the city, the Fire Protection District, State Fire Marshal, and any
other required state or local agency.
   (B)   State licensed pyrotechnic operator. A City Council approved state
licensed pyrotechnic operator who is approved to provide a public display of
fireworks by the discharge of dangerous fireworks for a one-time city conducted
special event or celebratory occasion, shall apply for a permit to ensure that
all state and local regulations, laws, and requirements for the safety and
welfare of persons and properties are met.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.25 QUALIFICATION FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   Permits for the sale of safe and sane fireworks shall be issued only if:
   (A)   The applicant is a bona fide nonprofit organization or corporation, as
recognized by the State of California, or a tax-exempt organization or
corporation recognized by the Federal Internal Revenue Service that was formed
primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, civic betterment, charitable, or
charitable purposes;
   (B)   The applicant is a nonprofit or tax-exempt organization affiliated
with the Riverbank Unified School District, located within the city limits of
the city; or
   (C)   (1)   The applicant is a nonprofit or tax-exempt organization from a
school within six miles of the city limits that has a student body consisting
of at least 50% Riverbank residents.
      (2)   Said applicant from a school outside the city limits shall not be
eligible for a permit if a permit is granted or is expected to be granted by
another jurisdiction.
   (D)   The nonprofit or tax-exempt organization shall provide proof of:
      (1)   Having a minimum of ten members of which at least 80% of its
current members reside within the city limits of Riverbank;
      (2)   Having been established within the city's postal area for at least
a period of one year;
      (3)   Having its principal and permanent meeting place in the city's
postal area; and
      (4)   Having demonstrated its purpose for existence, and its direct and
continuous services and benefits to the city in the past 12 months.
      (5)   An applicant from a school outside the city limits that may not
meet all the aforementioned criteria shall meet criteria that are satisfactory
to the Program Administrator.
   (E)   State licensed pyrotechnic operator. The City Council shall first
approve the display and use of dangerous fireworks for a one-time city
conducted special event or celebratory event, and said operator shall then
apply for a permit with the designated Program Administrator.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.26 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any organization or person(s) interested in obtaining a temporary
permit for a fireworks stand and sale of safe and sane fireworks shall first
obtain and file an application form provided by the city's Program
Administrator.
   (B)   Requirements shall include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Providing proof of tax exemption that is active and in good
standing;
      (2)   Providing a certificate of liability insurance that shall indicate
the limit amount as determined by the city's risk management authority for
liability coverage per occurrence for bodily injury, property damage, including
premises, operations, and product liability; that shall name the city as
certificate holder; that shall contain an attached separate endorsement to the
policy naming the city as an additional insured; and shall indicate that a 30-
day advance notice will be given to the city prior to cancellation or material
change of the policy; and
      (3)   Providing a copy of the applicant's current license as a fireworks
wholesaler/retailer by the State of California.
   (C)   The application may require any other information and additional
documentation as deemed necessary to make an adequate determination of
eligibility.
   (D)   State licensed pyrotechnic operator. Application requirements shall be
established as deemed necessary by the City Manager to ensure appropriate
liability coverage and documentation has been secured and all state and local
regulations, laws, and requirements are met.
   (E)   A nonrefundable permit processing fee of $50, or an amount as amended
by City Council resolution, shall be paid at the time of submittal of an
application. An exception of a refund may occur if a limit on the number of
permits allowed to be issued is declared by the City Manager, and as a result
of conducting a lottery the applicant is not selected.
   (F)   Business license and tax payment. Pursuant to §
110.08(F) license fees for eligible nonprofit or tax-exempt organizations shall
be waived.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.27 TIME FOR FILING.
   (A)   Applications shall be made available by March 1 and shall be filed by
the applicant no later than the close of business on March 31, or if offices
are closed, the close of business on the next open business day. Applications
submitted after the indicated deadline will not be accepted. Failure to meet
the requirements of the application for a permit will be reason for denial.
   (B)   State licensed pyrotechnic operator. A City Council approved operator
shall file an application for a permit not less than 15 days prior to the
event.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.28 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; NON-TRANSFERABILITY; DURATION.
   (A)   The Program Administrator, upon satisfaction that the applicant met
the requirements, may grant a permit, subject to any other conditions deemed
necessary for the public's health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   The City Manager shall have the discretion to set a maximum number of
permits that may be issued each calendar year to sell safe and sane fireworks.
If the number of applications received exceeds the number of permits allowed
for the year, a random lottery system will be conducted by the Program
Administrator, and applicants will be notified accordingly.
   (C)   To allow various Riverbank nonprofit and tax-exempt organizations an
opportunity to sell fireworks, no more than one permit per organization shall
be issued for the sale of fireworks during any one calendar year; any
affiliates will not be eligible for a permit. One issued permit allows for one
temporary stand for the sale of fireworks.
   (D)   The temporary city permit issued shall only be valid for the
organization named, the premises or address indicated, and for the dates
specified on the permit. The permit shall not be transferable, assignable, or
renewable.
   (E)   Applicants for a permit shall be notified by the Program Administrator
of the granting or denial of a permit no later than May 15 of each year.
   (F)   Transportation and storage. The permittee shall comply with all state
and local regulations and laws for the transportation and storage of fireworks
to be sold, used, or displayed.
   (G)   The city issued permit shall be posted at the stand for clear public
view, along with the State Fire Marshal's retail fireworks license permit, and
any other permit or sign required by state or local regulations or laws.
   (H)   The sale of fireworks may begin no earlier than 12:00 noon and end by
10:00 p.m. on June 28th, and may be sold daily thereafter from 9:00 a.m. to 10:
00 p.m., and shall cease by 10:00 p.m. on July 4th. All unsold stock shall be
removed from the location no later than 12:00 noon July 5th.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18; Am. Ord. 2020-005, passed 4-14-20)
§ 92.29 COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT RESTRICTIONS; CITY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any applicant who is issued a city permit to operate a temporary stand
for the sale of fireworks shall abide by and comply with all the regulations,
laws, requirements, conditions, and restrictions set by state and local
regulations and laws, which shall include:
      (1)   No person other than the official members of the organization,
their spouses, parents, or adult children shall sell or otherwise participate
in the sale of fireworks at the stand.
      (2)   No person other than the permitted organization shall operate the
stand or participate in the profits of the operation of the stand.
      (3)   No person shall be paid any consideration for selling or otherwise
participate in the sale of fireworks at the stand.
      (4)   No person under the age of 18 shall sell or participate in the sale
of fireworks, and no person under the age of 16 shall be sold or given
fireworks.
      (5)   All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be conducted only
within the permitted temporary fireworks stand; sale from any other building or
structure is prohibited.
   (B)   Should the dates and times allowed by the State Fire Marshal or local
Fire Protection District exceed the dates and times set by the city's code, all
permittees shall comply with the city's jurisdictional regulations.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.30 PROHIBITIONS OF USE OR DISPLAY, DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any fireworks in
violation of the regulations established by the city's code.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to possess, discharge, sell or offer for sale,
any fireworks within the city which are classified as "dangerous fireworks" as
defined by the Cal. Health & Safety Code.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person having the care, custody or
control of a person under the age of 16 years to permit such person to
discharge any safe and sane fireworks unless such minor does so under the
direct supervision of a person over 18 years of age, and during the hours and
on the days permitted by this subchapter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to throw, toss, project or position an ignited
firework of any kind in such a manner as to cause the firework or contents
thereof to come in contact with another person's body, private property, or
real property.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or permit the
discharge of any safe or sane fireworks within any public property, buildings,
or facilities, except by the approval of the City Council.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful to discharge any safe or sane fireworks during
any other time except during the period beginning June 28 through July 6
between the hours of 12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m. of each year; or as amended by
City Council resolution.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.31 FIREWORKS STAND SPECIFICATIONS.
   Temporary stands are subject to the requirements as forth in the application
and this code, including:
   (A)   A stand shall meet all the requirements for construction and
maintenance as to ensure the safety of the attendants and patrons as required
by the Chief Building Official or designee or the Fire Protection District.
   (B)   Fireworks stands may be erected no earlier than June 26 and shall be
removed, along with any related litter, no later than July 7 of each year.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.32 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   Any violations of this section shall be subject to the fine(s) and appeal
hearing process as stated under the fireworks regulations and enforcement
subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.33 APPEAL FOR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   If the Program Administrator denies the issuance of a permit or the
submittal of an application, the applicant making the request may appeal such
action by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Council. Such written
appeal notice shall be filed with the City Clerk within five days from the date
of notification of denial. The notice of appeal shall set forth the reasons for
the applicant's requested appeal. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal form, a
hearing shall be set before the City Council at the next regularly scheduled
meeting. Upon such hearing the Council may deny the application or grant the
application with such conditions as the Council shall deem proper.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
FIREWORKS REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 92.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION. An administrative citation is a "ticket" issued
when the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that a violation of the city's
code has occurred. It is an official notification, on an appropriate form as
established by the city, to include the code violation(s), and the amount of
the administrative fine required to be paid by the responsible person(s) in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Administrative citations are
not part of the judicial process unlike infraction or misdemeanor citations.
   BLOCK PARTY. A festive gathering event, only sponsored by persons such as
owners, residents, or tenants of a neighborhood, which will temporarily close
no more than one city block to vehicular traffic. The event shall not be for
commercial or advertising purposes or profit.
   BLOCK PARTY PERMIT. The city's permitting process in which the city will
issue residents a permit to temporarily close streets, other than arterial or
collector streets, and to establish appropriate and safe conditions for the
purpose of conducting a block party.
   CITEE. Any person served with an administrative citation charging him or her
as a responsible person for the violation.
   CITATION. An administrative citation issued pursuant to this section to
remedy a violation.
   CODE. The City of Riverbank Municipal Code.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (CEO). Any employee or agent or public safety
officer of the City of Riverbank designated by the City Council to enforce any
provision of this code.
   DANGEROUS FIREWORKS. As defined under Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 12505 and
12561 are:
      (1)   Any fireworks which contain any of the following:
         (a)   Arsenic sulfide, arsenates, or arsenites;
         (b)   Boron; or
         (c)   Chlorates, except:
            1.   In colored smoke mixture in which an equal or greater amount
of sodium bicarbonate is included;
            2.   In caps and party poppers;
            3.   In those small items (such as ground spinners) wherein the
total powder content does not exceed four grams of which not greater than 15%
(or 600 milligrams) is potassium, sodium, or barium chlorate;
            4.   Gallates or Gallic acid;
            5.   Magnesium (magnesium-aluminum alloys, called magnalium, are
permitted);
            6.   Mercury salts;
            7.   Phosphorous (red or white except that red phosphorus is
permissible in caps and party poppers);
            8.   Picrates or picric acid;
            9.   Thiocyanates;
            10.   Titanium, except in particle size greater than 100 mesh; or
            11.   Zirconium.
      (2)   Firecrackers.
      (3)   Skyrockets and rockets, including all devices which employ any
combustible or explosive material and which rise in the air during discharge.
      (4)   Roman candles, including all devices which discharge balls of fire
into the air.
      (5)   Chasers, including all devices which dart or travel about the
surface of the ground during discharge.
      (6)   Sparklers more than ten inches in length or one-fourth of one
(0.25") inch in diameter.
      (7)   All fireworks designed and intended by the manufacturer to create
the element of surprise upon the user. These items include, but are not limited
to, auto-foolers, cigarette loads, exploding golf balls, and trick matches.
      (8)   Fireworks known as devil-on-the-walk, or any other firework which
explodes through means of friction, unless otherwise classified by the State
Fire Marshal pursuant to this section.
      (9)   Torpedoes of all kinds which explode on impact.
      (10)   Fireworks kits.
      (11)   Such other fireworks examined and tested by the State Fire Marshal
and determined by him or her, with the advice of the State Board of Fire
Services, to possess characteristics of design or construction which make such
fireworks unsafe for use by any person not specially qualified or trained in
the use of fireworks.
   EXEMPT FIREWORKS. As defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 12508 means any
special item containing pyrotechnic compositions which the State Fire Marshal,
with the advice of the State Fire Advisory Board, has investigated and
determined to be limited to industrial, commercial, agricultural use, or
religious ceremonies when authorized by a permit granted by the authority
having jurisdiction.
   ISSUANCE or ISSUED. Any of the following:
      (1)   The preparation and service of an administrative fine citation to a
citee in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Cal.
Code of Civil Procedures Article III (commencing with § 415.10) of Chapter 4 of
Title 5 of Part 2;
      (2)   Mailing of administrative fine citation to the citee by certified
mail with return receipt, to the address shown on the official records of the
County Assessor; or
      (3)   By personally serving the responsible party by personal delivery of
the administrative fine citation or by substituted service. Substituted service
may be accomplished as follows:
         (a)   By leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual place of
residence, in the presence of a competent member of the household, and
thereafter mailing by First Class Mail a copy to the recipient at the address
where the copy was left; or
         (b)   In the event the responsible party cannot be served by First
Class Mail or cannot be personally served and has a property manager or rental
agency overseeing the premises, substituted service may be made upon the
property manager or rental agency or may be affected by posting the property
with the administrative fine citation and mailing a copy by First Class Mail to
the responsible party in violation at the address of the property where the
violation exists.
   PERSON. A natural person or a legal entity that is also an owner, tenant,
lessee and/or other person with any right to possession or control of the
property where a violation of this code occurred.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. A person who causes a code violation to occur or allows
a violation to exist or continue, by his or her action or failure to act, or
whose agent, employee or independent contractor causes a violation to occur, or
allows a violation to exist or continue, or any person with an ownership
interest or right of possession of the real property where unpermitted
fireworks are possessed, sold, used, manufactured or discharged, including, but
not limited to:
      (1)   Any owner-occupant.
      (2)   Any lessee, subtenant, licensee, or other person having possessory
control over a property, structure, or parcel of land.
      (3)   Any person that organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts, or
controls the gathering or any other person accepting responsibility for such a
gathering.
      (4)   Every owner, occupant, lessee, tenant, or holder of any possessory
interest of a residence or other private property within the city is required
to maintain, manage and supervise property and all persons thereon in a manner
so as not to violate the provisions of this subchapter. A responsible party
need not be present at the time dangerous fireworks are possessed,
manufactured, sold, used, or discharged in order for the city to issue an
administrative citation under this division.
      (5)   Any person, irrespective of age, found in violation of any
provision of this chapter may be issued a citation in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter. Every parent, guardian or other person, having
the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of 18 years, who
knows or reasonably should know that a minor is in violation of this chapter,
may be issued a citation in accordance with the provisions of this section, in
addition to any citation that may be issued to the offending minor.
      (6)   For purposes of this chapter, there may be more than one
responsible person for a violation.
   SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS. As defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 12529
and 12562 means any fireworks which do not come within the definition of
"dangerous fireworks" or "exempt fireworks."
   VIOLATION or VIOLATES. Refers to any violation of any provision of this
code.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.41 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This section authorizes the imposition of administrative fines on any
person who violates any provision of this code in order to encourage and obtain
compliance with the provisions of this code for the benefit and protection of
the entire community.
   (B)   This section governs the imposition, enforcement, collection, and
administrative review of all administrative fines, related to: the possession,
use, storage, sale and/or display of those fireworks classified as "dangerous
fireworks" as defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 12500 et seq., with the
exception of a pyrotechnic licensee when operating pursuant to that license;
and the use of "safe and sane fireworks" as defined in Cal. Health & Safety
Code §§ 12500 et seq. on or at dates, times and/or locations other than those
permitted by this code. Said administrative fines are imposed under authority
of Cal. Gov’t Code § 53069.4, Cal. Health & Safety Code § 12557, and the police
power of the city.
   (C)   This section imposes a duty upon the owners of all real property to
ensure that there are no violations of this code on such real property.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.42 ISSUANCE OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   (A)   The issuance of citations imposing administrative fines may be
performed at the discretion of the authorized officials of the city; and the
issuance of a citation to any person constitutes but one remedy of the city to
redress violations of this code by any person. By adopting this code, the city
does not intend to limit its authority to employ any other remedy, civil or
criminal, to redress any violation of this code by any person, which this city
may otherwise pursue.
   (B)   Whenever a Code Enforcement Officer determines that a violation of the
code has occurred, the officer may issue an administrative citation listing the
code violation(s) and the amount of the administrative fine required to be paid
by the responsible person(s) in accordance with the provisions of fines set
forth.
   (C)   Each violation of this code, whether on the same day or different day,
shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to a separate
administrative fine.
   (D)   The citee shall be required to abate the violation, and immediately
surrender all dangerous fireworks to the Code Enforcement Officer.
   (E)   The imposition of fines related to "dangerous firework" under this
chapter shall be limited to persons who possess, sell, use and/or display, or
the seizure of 25 pounds or less (gross weight), including packaging, of such
dangerous fireworks.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
§ 92.43 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.
   (A)   Each person who violates any provision of this code as it relates to
the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of "dangerous fireworks"
shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or
fines as follows:
 
Number of Offense in Amount of      (30 Day) Late Payment Total Amount of
One Year Period      Administrative Charge                Penalty plus Late
                     Penalty                              Charge
1st Offense          $1,000         $250                  $1,250
2nd Offense          $2,000         $500                  $2,500
3rd Offense          $3,000         $1,000                $4,000
 
   (B)   A person who fails to obtain a “block party permit,” license or
approval from the city when required by §
95.01(C) of the city code shall be subject to administrative fine or fines
under this chapter as follows:
 
Number of Offense in Amount of      (30 Day) Late Payment Total Amount of
One Year Period      Administrative Charge                Penalty plus Late
                     Penalty                              Charge
1st Offense          $500           $175                  $625
2nd Offense          $1,000         $250                  $1,250
3rd Offense          $1,500         $500                  $2,000
 
   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation who applies for and receives an
administratively issued “block party permit,” or similar license or approval
required by the city to close a street or otherwise reserve or use a piece of
city property, shall comply with all conditions imposed upon the issuance of
such permit, license, or approval, including but not limited to taking all
reasonable efforts necessary to ensure that “dangerous fireworks” are not used
at said event. Any person, firm, or corporation said to be in violation of the
permit by virtue of the fact that there were dangerous fireworks used at said
event, shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine
or fines as follows:
 
Number of Offense in Amount of      (30 Day) Late Payment Total Amount of
One Year Period      Administrative Charge                Penalty plus Late
                     Penalty                              Charge
1st Offense          $1,500         $375                  $1,875
2nd Offense          $3,000         $750                  $3,750
3rd Offense          $5,000         $2,000                $7,000
 
   (D)   Any person that fails to obtain a permit from the city to sell “safe
or sane fireworks” as required under this chapter, or any person who uses or
discharges any safe and sane fireworks on or at dates and times or at locations
other than what is allowed, are in violation of this chapter and shall be
subject to the following fine or fines:
 
Number of Offense in Amount of      (30 Day) Late Payment Total Amount of
One Year Period      Administrative Charge                Penalty plus Late
                     Penalty                              Charge
1st Offense          $250           $75                   $325
2nd Offense          $500           $150                  $650
3rd Offense          $750           $300                  $1,050
 
   (E)   The administrative fine(s) for violations of any of the above
provisions shall be due and payable to the City of Riverbank within 30 calendar
days from the date of issuance of the administrative citation. Failure to pay
the penalties in full within that time, shall have a late charge imposed in the
amount as set forth above, and shall begin accruing interest at the prevailing
established rate until fully paid. Late charges may be suspended if the city
has agreed to a payment plan, however, will be reinstated upon failure to make
a payment.
      (1)   Payment Plan. The citee may request to pay a fine through a payment
plan. The Director of Finance or designee will have the discretion to determine
if it is feasible to do so, and may request documentary evidence to make a
determination if paying the fine in full would cause undue financial hardship.
A payment plan will include a payment processing fee to cover costs for this
special service. The processing fee will be set by resolution, and is subject
to change from time to time by the City Council.
   (F)   Recovery of administrative penalties. The city may collect the
assessed administrative fine(s) and related administrative costs incurred such
as attorney fees, costs to collect fine(s), late fees, and interest, in any
manner allowed by law, including but not limited to recordation of a lien on
any real property owned by the responsible person.
   (G)   Payment of the administrative fine shall not excuse or discharge a
citee from the duty to immediately abate and correct a violation of the code,
nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or a
repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the code.
   (H)   On the second and each subsequent time that a person is issued a
citation for the same violation in any 12-month period, the fine is increased
as indicated above and the citee shall be liable for the amount of the new
fine, and any incurred associated late charges and interest, until it is paid,
in addition to being responsible for payment of previous fines.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be intended to limit any of the
penalties provided for under the Cal. Health & Safety Code or Cal. Penal Code.
   (J)   Fines collected pursuant to this administrative fine process for
dangerous fireworks violations:
      (1)   Shall not be subject to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 12706, which
provides that certain fines collected by a court of the state be deposited
with, and disbursed by, the County Treasurer;
      (2)   Shall include cost reimbursement to the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to regulations to be adopted by the State Fire Marshal addressing the State
Fire Marshal's cost for the transportation and disposal of dangerous fireworks
seized by the city; and
      (3)   Unless and until said regulations have been adopted by the State of
California, the city shall hold in trust $250 or 25% of any fine collected,
whichever is greater, to cover the cost reimbursement to the State Fire Marshal
for said cost of transportation and disposal of the dangerous fireworks.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18; Am. Ord. 2020-005, passed 4-14-20)
§ 92.44 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL HEARING.
   (A)   Requesting an appeal hearing.
      (1)   Any citee may contest the violation(s) and the issued
administrative citation by filing an appeal hearing request form with the City
Clerk within 30 days of the date of the citation. A filing fee, if established
by City Council resolution, shall be charged.
      (2)   Deposit. The citee must pay a deposit equal to half of the full
amount of the fine indicated on the citation on or before the request for a
hearing is filed; failure to deposit half of the amount of all fines appealed
within the 30-day filing period, shall constitute the request for an appeal
hearing incomplete and untimely and therefore not accepted.
      (3)   Failure to timely file an appeal hearing request form with the City
Clerk, along with the filing fee, if required, and deposit shall constitute a
waiver of the right to any appeal hearing, and the citation shall be deemed
confirmed and final.
      (4)   Hardship waiver. If within the 30-day filing period, the appealing
party establishes to the satisfaction of the Director of Finance or designee,
by means of tax returns, pay stubs or other similar documentary evidence, and
submits a declaration under penalty of perjury that paying the filing fee and/
or deposit amount would cause undue financial hardship to the appealing party,
the Director of Finance or designee may grant a waiver of the filing fee, and/
or waiver or reduction of the deposit amount required. The Director of
Finance's determination is not appealable and shall be final as to the hardship
waiver request.
   (B)   Hearing body. The appeal shall be heard by an Appeals Board. The
Planning Commission, in accordance with §
32.35(F) of this Code of Ordinances, shall act as the Appeals Board. Members of
the Appeals Board shall not have had any responsibility for the investigation,
prosecution or enforcement of nuisances under this chapter and shall not have
any personal involvement with the appellant or with the appeal to be heard.
   (C)   Setting the appeal hearing.
      (1)   The Appeals Board hearing shall be set in accordance with the
regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting, but shall be opened as a
separate and distinct body.
      (2)   At least ten calendar days prior to the hearing, the City Clerk
will notify all persons in writing indicating the date, time, and place to
appear for their scheduled appeal hearing, and include a notice to their right
to appeal to the City Council and the number of days to do so. First Class Mail
or e-mail service of this notice is deemed complete at the time sent.
      (3)   The failure of an appellant to receive a properly addressed notice
shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing, city action or proceeding,
which is conducted pursuant to this chapter.
      (4)   The City Clerk shall notify the Code Enforcement staff of the filed
appeal request; who shall then submit copies of any documentation to the City
Clerk of the administrative citation(s), fines, and reasons for issuance.
      (5)   The hearing will be conducted within 60 days of the date that a
timely and complete appeal request is received by the City Clerk. However, this
time may be extended due to the constraints posed by the Planning Commission’s
meeting schedule.
   (D)   Appeal hearing procedures. The Appeals Board shall hear all requests
for administrative appeal hearings in accordance with the procedures
established herein.
      (1)   Testimony at the hearing. At the time set for the appeal hearing,
the Appeals Board shall proceed to hear testimony from the city’s
representative, the appellant, and any other competent persons or witnesses.
      (2)   Oath of sworn testimony. The Appeals Board shall consider sworn
testimony. The Chairperson or Clerk of the Board shall administer the oath or
affirmation to anyone testifying or providing any evidence for the Board to
consider.
      (3)   Evidence rules. Cal. Gov't Code § 11513(a), (b), and (c) shall
apply to all administrative hearings. At the sole discretion of the Appeals
Board Chair, other relevant evidence may be admissible and hearsay evidence may
be used for the purpose of supplementing and explaining other evidence.
      (4)   Continuances. Hearings may be continued once for extreme or unusual
cause at the request of city staff, the appellant, or upon the Appeals Board’s
own motion.
      (5)   Record of oral evidence at hearing. The proceedings at the hearing
shall be recorded by video and audio or by audio recording. Either party may
provide a certified shorthand reporter to maintain a record of the proceedings
at the requesting party's own expense.
      (6)   Burden of proof. The accuracy of the notice and order containing
the description of the violations and/or public nuisance and the actions
required to abate such nuisance or violation is deemed a rebuttable presumption
and the burden is on the appellant to provide such facts and information to
overcome such presumption by a preponderance of the evidence.
   (E)   Rights of parties.
      (1)   Each party shall have the following rights among others: To call
and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; to
introduce documentary and physical evidence; to cross-examine opposing
witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; to impeach any
witness regardless of which party first called that witness to testify; to
rebut the evidence against him or her; to represent himself or herself or to be
represented by anyone of his or her choice.
      (2)   Use of interpreter. If a party does not proficiently speak or
understand the English language, that party may provide an interpreter, at that
party's own cost, to translate for the party. An interpreter shall be:
         (a)   At least 18 years of age;
         (b)   Shall not have been a resident of the premises at issue;
         (c)   Shall not have had any personal relationship with or involvement
in the party’s case prior to the hearing; and
         (d)   Shall have the ability to translate the Oath of Sworn Testimony.
   (F)   Official notice. In reaching a decision, the Appeals Board may take
official notice, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of
any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or which
may appear in any of the official records of the city or county or any of their
departments.
   (G)   Hearing decision.
      (1)   After consideration of all testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, the Appeals Board shall issue a decision to uphold or reverse the
notice of violation and citation imposed by the city, and shall state the
reasons therefore. The Appeals Board may not reduce, waive or conditionally
reduce the fines established by the city.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall affirm in writing the Appeals Board’s decision
and reasons, within seven business days to the appellant, and include the
ability to exercise appeal rights before the City Council. Notice of the
decision will also be provided to the Code Enforcement Division and the Finance
Department. Failure of the appellant to receive a properly addressed written
decision shall not invalidate any hearing, action, or proceeding conducted
pursuant to this chapter.
      (3)   Refund. If the decision of the administrative citation is reversed,
a refund of the deposit shall be made by the city in accordance with the city’s
customary refund and payment process.
      (4)   Payment of fine. If the decision of the administrative citation is
upheld, full payment by the appellant is due by the 11th calendar day following
the date of the Appeal’s Board decision. If a complete and timely appeal
hearing request before the City Council has been filed with the City Clerk, the
payment shall be suspended until a final decision by the Council has been made.
Full payment is not required if a payment plan has been agreed upon with the
city. Late charges may be suspended with an agreed upon payment plan, however,
will be reinstated upon failure to make a payment.
         (a)   Payment plan. The appellant may request to pay a fine through a
payment plan. The Director of Finance or designee will have the discretion to
determine if it is feasible to do so, and may request documentary evidence to
make a determination if paying the fine in full would cause undue financial
hardship. A payment plan will include a payment processing fee to cover costs
for this special service. The processing fee will be set by resolution, and is
subject to change from time to time by the City Council.
   (H)   Finality of appeal's decision.
      (1)   If an appellant is not satisfied with the action of the Appeals
Board a request for an appeal hearing before the City Council may be made by
filing an appeal request form, and a filing fee established by resolution, with
the City Clerk within ten calendar days following the date of the Board’s
decision.
      (2)   If the Appeals Board’s decision is not appealed in a timely manner
as required, the decision shall be deemed confirmed and final. Full payment of
the fine shall immediately be due, unless a payment plan with the city has been
agreed upon.
      (3)   Setting the appeal hearing. The process to set an appeal hearing
before the City Council will be processed as set for an appeal hearing under §
92.44(C).
      (4)   Appeal hearing procedures. The City Council shall hear all requests
for administrative appeal hearings in accordance with the procedures
established under §
92.44(D), (E), (F), and (G); except for the right to appeal the matter further.
The term Appeal’s Board shall be replaced by the term City Council where
applicable.
      (5)   The City Council of the City of Riverbank is the final reviewing
authority and an appeal of the City Council’s final decision is not appealable
to the Superior Court.
(Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18; Am. Ord. 2020-005, passed 4-14-20)
SMOKING RESTRICTIONS
§ 92.50 SMOKING RESTRICTIONS IN CITY OWNED BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. Every citizen has the right to choose for himself or herself
whether to smoke tobacco or marijuana and it is not the intention of the city
to interfere with such freedom of choice. Further, every citizen who chooses to
not smoke has the right to be free from offensive tobacco or marijuana smoke
and to be free from the health hazard of tobacco or marijuana smoke when
employed by the city or conducting business with the city in specified areas.
(’67 Code, § 4-8-1)
   (B)   Definition. SMOKE or SMOKING. As used in this section means the
carrying, holding, possession or smoking of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette,
joint or the lighting of a pipe, cigar, cigarette or joint.
(’67 Code, § 4-8-2)
   (C)   Areas subject to nonsmoking regulations. Areas subject to nonsmoking
regulation are:
      (1)   All city offices and conference rooms.
      (2)   Elevators which are generally used by and open to the public.
      (3)   Council Chambers of the City Hall.
      (4)   Public waiting rooms, hallways and lobbies except those which may
be specifically designated as smoking areas.
      (5)   Riverbank Community Center, Riverbank Teen Center, and Riverbank
Pool.
(’67 Code, § 4-8-3)
   (D)   Duty to post signs or notices. Appropriate “No Smoking” signs shall be
conspicuously posted in each area of those city buildings where smoking is
prohibited by this chapter. The city official in charge of the building in
which areas have been closed to smoking shall ensure that signs are posted and
remain posted advising city employees and the public of designated nonsmoking
areas.
(’67 Code, § 4-8-4)
   (E)   Enforcement. The city official in charge of the building in which
areas have been closed to smoking shall make a report to the City Council in
the event voluntary compliance by members of the public becomes ineffective.
(’67 Code, § 4-8-5) (Ord. 91-04, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord. 2017-004, passed 2-
28-17; Am. Ord. 2018-007, passed 12-11-18)
Statutory reference:
   State smoking regulations generally, see Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 118875
et seq.
CHAPTER 93: NOISE
Section
   
93.01   Purpose
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Noise measurement criteria
   
93.04   Exterior noise standards
   
93.05   Interior noise standards
   
93.06   Prohibited noises
   
93.07   Noise source exemptions
   
93.08   Electrical substations
   
93.09   Noise permit
   
93.10   Violation; enforcement
§ 93.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council declares and finds that excessive noise levels are
detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety and contrary to the public
interest as follows:
      (1)   By interfering with sleep, communication, or relaxation;
      (2)   By contributing to hearing impairment and a wide range of adverse
physiological stress conditions; and
      (3)   By adversely affecting the value of real property.
   (B)   It is the intent of this chapter to protect persons from excessive
levels of noise within or near a residence, school, church, hospital or public
library.
   (C)   The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a
violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      (1)   The level of the noise;
      (2)   The intensity of the noise;
      (3)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
      (4)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
      (5)   The level and frequency content of the background noise or ambient
noise, if any;
      (6)   The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities or
dwelling units;
      (7)   The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise
emanates;
      (8)   The time of the day or night the noise occurs;
      (9)   The duration of the noise;
      (10)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and
      (11)   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial
activity.
(Ord. 95-04, passed 4-10-95)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL PROPERTY. Land zoned for agricultural use.
   AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL. The composite of noise from all sources excluding the
alleged offensive noise. In this context it represents the normal or existing
level of environmental noise at a given location for a specified time of the
day or night.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound level in decibels as measured with a sound
level meter using the A-weighted network (scale) at slow meter response. The
unit measurement is referred to herein as dB(A) or dBA.
   CONSTRUCTION. Construction, erection, enlargement, alteration, conversion or
movement of any building, structures or land together with any scientific
surveys associated therewith.
   DECIBEL. A unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound equal to twenty times
the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound
measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty micropascals.
   EMERGENCY WORK. The use of any machinery, equipment, vehicle, manpower or
other activity in a short term effort to protect, or restore safe conditions in
the community, or work by private or public utilities when restoring unplanned
interruption of utility service.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The City Manager or duly authorized deputy.
   EQUIVALENT HOURLY SOUND LEVEL (LEQ). The constant sound level that contains
the same total energy as the actual time-varying sound level over a one-hour
period.
   FIXED NOISE SOURCE. A device or machine which creates sounds while fixed or
stationary, including but not limited to residential, agricultural, industrial
and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air
conditioners, refrigeration equipment, or vehicles operating off the public
right-of-way.
   HOSPITAL. Any building or portion thereof used for the overnight
accommodation and medical care of the sick, injured or infirm persons and
includes rest homes and nursing homes.
   IMPULSIVE NOISE. A noise of short duration, usually less than one second,
with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.
   INTRUDING NOISE LEVEL. The sound level created, caused, maintained or
originating from an alleged offensive source, measured in decibels, at a
specified location while the alleged offensive source is in operation.
   MOBILE NOISE SOURCE. Any noise source other than a fixed noise source.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any car, truck, motorcycle, motor scooter, and any and all
self-propelled vehicles, as defined in the California Vehicle Code, including
but not limited to mini-bikes and go-carts.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which violates the quantitative standards set
forth in this chapter.
   RESIDENCE. Residential property.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. A parcel of real property which is zoned and developed
for residential purposes.
   SCHOOL. Public or private institutions conducting regular academic
instruction at preschool, kindergarten, elementary, secondary or collegiate
levels.
   SIMPLE TONE NOISE. Any noise which is distinctly audible as a single pitch
(frequency) or set of pitches as determined by the enforcement officer.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument meeting American National Standards
Institute Standard S1.4-1971 for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters or an
instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will
provide equivalent data.
(Ord. 95-04, passed 4-10-95)
§ 93.03 NOISE MEASUREMENT CRITERIA.
   (A)   Any noise measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be made with a sound level meter using the A-weighted network (scale) at
slow meter response. Fast meter response shall be used for impulsive type
sounds. Calibration of the measurement equipment utilizing an acoustical
calibrator shall be performed immediately prior to recording any noise data.
   (B)   The exterior noise levels shall be measured from the property line of
the affected property. Where practical, the microphone shall be positioned
three to five feet above the ground and away from reflective surfaces. The
interior noise level shall be measured within the affected dwelling unit, at
points at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise
source, with windows in the normal seasonal configuration. The reported
interior noise level shall be determined by taking the arithmetic average of
the readings taken at the various microphone locations.
(Ord. 95-04, passed 4-10-95)
§ 93.04 EXTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated
area of the city to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise, on
property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person which
causes the exterior noise level when measured at any affected single- or
multiple-family residence, school, church, hospital or public library situated
in either the incorporated or unincorporated area to exceed the noise level
standards as set forth in the following table:
 
EXTERIOR NOISE LEVEL STANDARDS
Time Period      Allowable Equivalent     Allowable Maximum
                 Hourly Sound Level (LEQ) Sound Level (LMAX)
7 a.m. - 10 p.m. 50 dBA                   70 dBA
10 p.m. - 7 a.m. 45 dBA                   65 dBA
   (B)   In the event the measured ambient noise level exceeds the applicable
noise level standard, the applicable standard shall be adjusted so as to equal
the ambient noise level.
   (C)   Each of the noise level standards specified above shall be reduced by
five dB(A) for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or
music or for recurring impulsive noises.
   (D)   If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot reasonably be
discontinued or stopped for a time period so that the ambient noise level can
be measured, the noise level measured while the source is in operation shall be
compared to the noise level standards specified above.
(Ord. 95-04, passed 4-10-95)
§ 93.05 INTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, at any location within the city, to
operate or cause to be operated within a dwelling unit, any source of sound or
to allow the creation of any noise which causes the noise level when measured
inside a receiving dwelling unit situated in the area either within the city or
adjacent to the city to exceed the noise level standards as set forth in the
following table:
 
INTERIOR NOISE LEVEL STANDARDS
Time Period      Allowable Equivalent     Allowable Maximum
                 Hourly Sound Level (LEQ) Sound Level (LMAX)
7 a.m. - 10 p.m. 40 dBA                   60 dBA
10 p.m. - 7 a.m. 35 dBA                   55 dBA
   (B)   In the event the measured ambient noise level exceeds the applicable
noise level standard, the applicable standard shall be adjusted so as to equal
the ambient noise level.
   (C)   Each of the noise level standards specified above shall be reduced by
five dB(A) for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or
music, or for recurring impulsive noises.
   (D)   If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot reasonably be
discontinued or stopped for a time period so that the ambient noise level can
be measured, the noise level measured while the source is in operation shall be
compared to the noise level standards specified above.
(Ord. 95-04, passed 4-10-95)
§ 93.06 PROHIBITED NOISES.
   The following activities are declared to cause excessive, offensive,
disturbing or intrusive noise in violation of this section;
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to unnecessarily sound any horn or
other signaling device on any vehicle except as an emergency or danger warning
signal. This provision shall be inapplicable to the sounding of any horn, bell,
whistle, siren or other audible warning device which is operated in compliance
with Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 7604, or any other state or federal provision
governing railroad operations or for emergency work as defined in this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to play or operate any drum, radio, phonograph,
loud speaker, sound amplifier, car radio-CD or tape deck, television, or
similar sound amplifying equipment, whether mobile or from a fixed location
upon the public streets, public right-of-way, or in public parks in such a
fashion that it is clearly audible at a distance of 50 feet. The City Council
hereby finds and declares that any sound or noise audible at such a distance
constitutes an intrusive noise and public nuisance, and endangers the public
safety and welfare by interference with normal human capability for hearing
nearby traffic movements and warning signals. This section shall be
inapplicable to radio systems operated under or pursuant to Federal
Communications Commission licenses in the regular course of business.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make loud or raucous yelling,
shouting, whistling, or singing so as to cause a noise disturbance. This
includes the solicitation, sale or advertising of any product or service by
shouting or outcry within any residential or commercial area or noise sensitive
zone of the city, except by a noise permit issued by the Noise Control Officer.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or permit to
be kept or maintained, upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by any
person any animal which, by any frequent or long continued noise, shall cause
annoyance or discomfort. Any noise which is audible continuously for ten
minutes or intermittently for 30 minutes shall be evidence of such annoyance or
discomfort. Factors which can be used to evaluate excessive animal noise
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   The time of day;
      (2)   The frequency;
      (3)   The duration; and
      (4)   The frequency content.
(Ord. 95-04, passed 4-10-95)
§ 93.07 NOISE SOURCE EXEMPTIONS.
   The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
   (A)   Activities conducted in unlighted public parks, public playgrounds and
public or private school grounds, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.,
and in lighted public parks, public playgrounds and public or private school
grounds, during the hours of 7:00 am. to 11:00 p.m., including but not limited
to school athletic and school entertainment events.
   (B)   Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or
connected with emergency activities or emergency work.
   (C)   Noise sources associated with construction provided such activities do
not take place between 6:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays or 5:00 p.m. and 8:
00 a.m. on weekends and legal holidays.
   (D)   Noise sources associated with agricultural activities on agricultural
zoned property.
   (E)   Noise sources associated with the collection of waste, garbage, and
street sweeping.
   (F)   Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by
state or federal law.
   (G)   Noise sources associated with work performed by private or public
utilities in the maintenance or modification of its facilities.
   (H)   Noise sources associated with the maintenance of residential property
provided such activities take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m., Monday through Friday or 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Saturday, Sunday, and
holidays.
   (I)   Noise sources associated with public supported events (that is,
Farmers Market, Cheese and Wine Festival, parades, and similar events.)
(Ord. 95-04, passed 4-10-95)
§ 93.08 ELECTRICAL SUBSTATIONS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §§
93.04 and
93.05, noise sources associated with the operation of electrical substations
shall not exceed 50 dBA when measured as provided in
§ 93.03.
(Ord. 95-04, passed 4-10-95)
§ 93.09 NOISE PERMIT.
   (A)   The owner or operator of a noise source which the enforcement officer
has determined violates any of the provisions of this chapter may file an
application with the enforcement officer for a noise permit to vary from strict
compliance with any particular provisions of this chapter where such noise
permit will not result in a hazardous condition or a nuisance and strict
compliance would be unreasonable in view of all circumstances. The owner or
operator shall set forth all actions taken to comply with such provisions and
the reasons why immediate compliance cannot be achieved. A separate application
shall be filed for each noise source, provided, however, that several mobile
sources under common ownership or fixed sources under common ownership on a
single property may be combined into one application.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a complete application and fee, and within 30 days
thereafter, the enforcement officer shall either approve such request in whole
or in part, deny the request, or refer the request directly to the City Council
for action thereon in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In the
event the noise permit request is approved, reasonable conditions may be
imposed which may include restriction on noise level, noise duration and
operating hours, an approved method of achieving compliance and a time schedule
for its implementation. The decision of the enforcement officer is subject to
appeal to the City Council for a public hearing by filing a written appeal with
the enforcement officer not later than 15 days following the date of the
enforcement officer's written decision to the applicant.
   (C)   Factors which the enforcement officer or the City Council must
consider shall include but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Present and potential uses of property within the area affected by
noise;
      (2)   Factors related to initiating and completing all remedial work;
      (3)   Age and useful life of the existing noise source; and
      (4)   The general public interest, health, safety and welfare.
   (D)   The applicant may appeal the decision of the enforcement officer to
the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The City
Council shall either affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Enforcement
Officer. Such decisions shall be final and shall be based upon the
considerations set forth in this section.
(Ord. 95-04, passed 4-10-95)
§ 93.10 VIOLATION; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be an
infraction as specified in of §
10.99 of this code. The provisions of this chapter may also be enforced by a
court ordered injunction brought by the city. Any violation of the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed to be a public nuisance.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, violations of any provisions
of this chapter shall be as follows:
 
   VIOLATION                                       PENALTY
First                                                 Written notification
Second                                                $100 fine
Third                                                 $200 fine
Fourth or subsequent violations of the same ordinance $500 fine
within one year.
      (2)   The Enforcement Officer shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   In addition to any other penalties provided in this chapter, a person
convicted of violating this chapter shall reimburse the city any cost incurred
for conducting noise test used in obtaining the conviction.
(Ord. 95-04, passed 4-10-95)
CHAPTER 94: PARK REGULATIONS
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Permit for public gathering
   
94.03   Closing hours
   
94.04   Rules and regulations
   
94.05   Glass containers prohibited
   
94.06   Alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
94.07   Acts prohibited
   
94.08   Animals in city parks
   
94.09   Order closing city parks
   
94.10   Order to leave city parks
   
94.11   Skate park facility
   
94.12   Bounce houses and other inflatable devices
   
94.13   Enforcement
   
94.14   Notice
   
94.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Community Recreation Commission, see
§§ 32.01 through 32.07
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AT LARGE. An animal off the premises of its owner and not under restraint by
a leash.
   DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog, except one assisting a peace officer engaged in law
enforcement duties, which demonstrates any of the following behavior, is
presumed dangerous:
      (1)   An attack which requires a defensive action by any person to
prevent bodily injury or property damage when such person is conducting himself
or herself peacefully and lawfully.
      (2)   An attack which results in property damage or in an injury to a
person when such a person is conducting himself or herself peacefully and
lawfully.
      (3)   An attack on another animal, livestock, or poultry which occurs on
property other than that of the owner of the attacking dog.
      (4)   Any behavior which constitutes a threat of bodily harm to a person
when such person is conducting himself or herself peacefully and lawfully.
   DOG LICENSE. A license tag required to be obtained annually for each
individual dog.
   LIVESTOCK. Any domesticated cattle, goats, swine, sheep, and equine which
are kept in captivity or under the control or ownership of any person for any
purpose.
   PARKS. All parks owned by the city.
   POLICE SERVICES COMMANDING OFFICER. The city's Police Services Commanding
Officer and his or her authorized representative.
(`67 Code, § 3-11-1) (Am. Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15)
§ 94.02 PERMIT FOR PUBLIC GATHERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, association, society or company to hold
any picnic, celebration, service, exercise or assembly for 100 or more persons,
or to which the general public is admitted or invited to attend, unless a
permit in writing therefor is obtained from the Director of Parks and
Recreation or designee pursuant to the permit requirements established and
amended from time to time by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
(`67 Code, § 3-11-2) (Am. Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15)
§ 94.03 CLOSING HOURS.
   (A)   With the exception of Jacob Myers Park, all city parks shall be open
to the public from 6:00 a.m. until one hour after dusk, except for a city-
sanctioned function or event. Each park shall have the closing hours posted at
the entrance or at some other prominent place in the park.
   (B)   Jacob Myers Park shall have the following hours:
      (1)   April through September the Jacob Myers Park will be open from 7:00
a.m. until 8:00 p.m., with the trail area in the park closing at 7:30 p.m.
      (2)   October through March the Jacob Myers Park will be open from 7:00
a.m. until 6:00 p.m., with the trail area in the park closing at 5:30 p.m.
   (C)   At all other times, aside from the hours designated herein, all city
parks shall be closed to the public. Visiting or entering a city park at a time
that it is closed to the public is a violation of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 3-11-3) (Am. Ord. 98-06, passed 11-23-98; Am. Ord. 2015- 011,
passed 6-23-15)
§ 94.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   In order to promote the safety, comfort and convenience of persons using any
park or recreation area, the Council may, from time to time, by ordinance,
adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter. Such rules and regulations may include regulating the speed of
vehicles, establishing parking areas, and areas where parking and driving of
vehicles is prohibited, areas where certain games and activities are prohibited
and such other rules and regulations as in the opinion of the Council are
necessary for the safety, comfort and convenience of persons using such park or
recreation area. When such rules and regulations have been adopted and signs
erected within the park or recreation area or portions thereof affected thereby
informing the public of the substance of such rules and regulations, it shall
be unlawful for any person to fail to comply therewith.
(`67 Code, § 3-11-4) (Ord. 78-11, passed 7-24-78; Am. Ord. 2005-011, passed 6-
27-05)
§ 94.05 GLASS CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.
   The use or possession of any bottle or glass container which was originally
designed for use as a beverage container or which contains a beverage by any
person, association, society or company while on the premises of any city park
shall be unlawful.
(`67 Code, § 3-11-5) (Ord. 86-25, passed 10-27-86)
§ 94.06 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   Consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited in all municipal
parks.
(`67 Code, § 3-11-6) (Ord. 91-07, passed 5-13-91; Am. Ord. 96-05, passed 6-10-
96)
Cross-reference:
   Alcohol regulated, see
§§ 111.01 and 111.02
§ 94.07 ACTS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following:
   (A)   To drive or operate any motor vehicle in any park at a speed in excess
of 15 miles per hour.
   (B)   To commit in riotous, boisterous, threatening, or indecent conduct or
language or to otherwise make noises in such a manner as to disturb any picnic,
meeting, sporting event, or reasonable person.
   (C)   To disturb or interfere with any employee of the city or designee
acting within the scope of his or her employment, or to disturb or interfere
with any spectator or participant in any event or activity conducted in any
city park, or to enter any park for the purpose of committing any such
disturbance or interference.
   (D)   To smoke tobacco or marijuana in any city park area designated as a
tobacco free zone.
   (E)   To consume alcoholic beverages within any city park or with 15 feet of
an abutting edge of any city park or parking lot of any city park.
   (F)   To enter or remain in a park while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or any drug.
   (G)   To litter, soil, or defile restrooms. No person over the age of six
years shall use restrooms designated for the opposite sex.
   (H)   To move or remove from one location to another any equipment used for
park maintenance or to tamper with any park equipment.
   (I)   To climb onto any building or structure in a park not designated for
such activity.
   (J)   To offer any article of food or drink for sale; or station or place
any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such
article of food or drink in the park or on public property adjacent to such
park without a permit issued by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
   (K)   To fail to obey all posted signs regulating park use.
   (L)   To fail to obey the lawful order of any peace officer, or city
employee or other individual authorized to enforce the rules and regulations as
set forth herein.
   (M)   To fail to obey all traffic regulations concerning the use of vehicles
or caution, stopping, parking and all other signs posted for control or to
safeguard life and property.
   (N)   To park a vehicle in a park in any place other than an established or
designated parking area or use a parking area in a manner not in accordance
with the posted directions or the instructions of a designated city
representative or peace officer who may be present.
   (O)   To deface or vandalize city property or the property of others within
a park.
   (P)   To dig or otherwise disturb any park area or in any way injure or
impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any park area.
   (Q)   To violate any provision of
Chapter 91, Animal Control, of the code or this chapter within a city park.
(`67 Code, § 3-11-7) (Ord. 99-02, passed 3-8-99; Am. Ord. 2003-015, passed 11-
24-03; Am. Ord. 2009-009, passed 10-12-09; Am. Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15;
Am. Ord. 2017-004, passed 2-28-17) Penalty, see §
94.99 
§ 94.08 ANIMALS IN CITY PARKS.
   (A)   Animals in city parks are subject to the requirements of
Chapter 91 of the code and subject to the provisions of this chapter when
animal control issues arise in a city park. The person owning, controlling or
having custody of such animal shall be jointly and severally responsible for
all damages caused by such animal.
   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, livestock or domesticated fowl, birds,
and reptiles are prohibited in city parks except under the direction of the
city's Director of Parks and Recreation related to community special events.
   (C)   For purposes of providing immediate safety and health measures to city
park patrons and personnel, in addition to those authorized to enforce Chapter
91, Animal Control, of the code, any authorized city staff member or contracted
security services personnel designated by the city's Director of Parks and
Recreation can enforce the following provisions and issue an administrative
citation for said violations within city parks.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person having charge, care,
custody, or control of any dog, whether licensed or unlicensed:
      (1)   To enter a city park with a dog that is not restrained with a leash
of no more than six feet in length and of suitable strength.
      (2)   To enter a city park without a current dog license tag attached to
the dog's collar, harness, or other dog restraining device and keep the license
displayed at all times. A warning citation may be issued for the violation of
this provision.
      (3)   To enter a city park with a vicious or dangerous dog which
demonstrates threatening or aggressive behavior towards people or other animals
or that has a known history of such behavior.
      (4)   To suffer, permit, or allow the dog to run at large in any city
park.
      (5)   To allow a dog to remain upon the open bed or areas of any truck,
trailer, or vehicle, without being securely and safely restrained by a
substantial chain or leash that prevents the dog from expending any part of its
body past the edge of the bed or open area of the truck, trailer, or vehicle,
and which prevents said dog from causing any harm to itself or any park patron
or personnel.
      (6)   To leave a dog alone and unattended in a vehicle, truck, or trailer
or on the premises of a city park.
      (7)   To permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care
or control, such dog to defecate and to allow the feces to remain upon a public
park, and fail to immediately and securely enclose all feces deposited by such
dog in a bag, wrapper, or other container, and dispose of it in a sanitary
manner.
      (8)   This provision shall not apply to individuals with disabilities who
have the charge or control of a certified guide or assistance dog.
      (9)   To permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care
or control, such dog to urinate upon city playground equipment, a facility or
facility equipment, or upon the property of patrons in a city park.
      (10)   To remain on the premises of a city park with a dog that has
demonstrated threatening or aggressive behavior towards people or other
animals, or that has attacked, bitten, scratched, or harassed people or other
animals without provocation.
      (11)   To permit a dog to create a public nuisance threatening the safety
and health of people or other animals or disturbing the peace in a city park.
   (E)   Any person violating any of these provisions may be cited and ordered
to leave the park.
   (F)   Procedures upon a dog bite. In the event that any dog shall bite any
person or shall attack another animal on the premises of a city park, the
designated city personnel or contracted security services personnel shall have
the authority, as appropriate:
      (1)   To determine whether such incident requires an emergency call to
the city's animal control services, police services, and medical responders.
      (2)   To complete an incident report and provide a copy of the report to
the City Manager for follow up with the city's contracted animal control
services.
      (3)   To request the dog license information of such dog.
      (4)   To inform the owner or any person having charge, care, custody, or
control of such dog, to deliver such dog to the Oakdale animal shelter.
      (5)   To issue an administrative citation for violations under this
chapter.
      (6)   To request the owner or any person having charge, care, custody, or
control of such dog to leave the city park with such dog.
(Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15)
§ 94.09 ORDER CLOSING CITY PARKS.
   (A)   Peace officers, or as designated by the Director of Parks and
Recreation, contracted security services personnel, and other authorized
employees, may at any time order that all or part of a city park, either
temporarily or at regular intervals be closed. It shall be a misdemeanor for
any person to remain in the area after such an order has been given.
   (B)   The individual giving the order to close the park shall, on the next
regular city workday, submit to the City Manager a detailed report of the
reasons for the order.
(`67 Code, § 3-11-9) (Ord. 99-02, passed 3-8-99; Am. Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-
23-15) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.10 ORDER TO LEAVE CITY PARKS.
   As a further measure to protect the health, safety, and welfare of persons
using a city park, any person violating a provision of this chapter or, while
in a city park, any provision of state or local law may be ordered by a peace
officer, employee, or any agent of the city authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter to leave all or part of a city park and not to
reenter such area for any period up to 24 hours. Failure to obey such order
shall be an infraction, in addition to the original violation.
(`67 Code, § 3-11-10) (Ord. 99-02, passed 3-8-99; Am. Ord. 2011-003, passed 6-
27-11; Am. Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.11 SKATE PARK FACILITY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to use or operate a skateboard, inline
skates, or similar device on or in a public skate park facility located within
the city, unless that person is, at all times, wearing properly fitted and
fastened protective devices consisting of a helmet, knee pads, wrist guards,
and elbow pads, which are commercially manufactured and designed specifically
for the designated activity. The only coasting devices permitted within a
public skate park facility are skateboards, roller skates, and inline skates.
Bicycles, coasters, scooters, or other rolling or wheeled devices are strictly
prohibited.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to use or possess tobacco or marijuana products
of any kind, including but not limited to, chewing tobacco, cigars, cigarettes,
joints, pipes, and smoking vapor devices in or upon any city skate park
facility or within 50 feet of the exterior boundaries of such facilities and to
discard lighted or unlighted cigars, cigarettes, joints, pipes, or smoking
vapor devices, in said areas.
   (C)   Alcohol and other controlled substances are prohibited anywhere within
50 feet of the skate park.
   (D)   No person under the age of 12 years of age will use the skate park
without the supervision of a parent or legal guardian.
   (E)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section is guilty
of an infraction punishable in accordance with the provisions of the Riverbank
Municipal Code.
   (F)   The parent or legal guardian having control or custody of an un-
emancipated minor whose conduct violates this section shall be jointly and
severally liable with the minor for any fines imposed pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 2003-004, passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15; Am. Ord.
2017-004, passed 2-28-17)
§ 94.12 BOUNCE HOUSES AND OTHER INFLATABLE DEVICES.
   (A)   It is unlawful to have bounce houses or any similar inflatable device
on city park premises or other city property without a city issued permit. The
permit requires compliance with the manufacturer's operating procedures for the
specific bounce house or inflatable device. The fee for the permit shall be
established by City Council resolution.
   (B)   The bounce house or inflatable device company used is required to have
a Riverbank Business License and provide a Certificate of Insurance of
$1,000,000 and name the City of Riverbank as additional insured as well as any
other insurance terms the city may require.
   (C)   The city will specify where the bounce house or similar inflatable
device is to be located at each park in order to eliminate damage to sprinkler
heads, lawn area, and the like.
   (D)   Vehicles are prohibited to drive onto any park area to load or unload
the bounce house or similar inflatable device.
   (E)   Bounce houses or any similar inflatable device shall be operated by a
generator to avoid cords causing a tripping hazard.
   (F)   Water bounce houses and two-story bounce houses or any similar
inflatable devices are prohibited.
   (G)   Bounce houses or any similar inflatable devices are prohibited at
Jacob Myers Park.
(Ord. 2005-011, passed 6-27-05; Am. Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15)
§ 94.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any violation of this chapter shall be enforceable pursuant to
Chapter 99 of the Municipal Code of Riverbank. Peace officers, or as designated
by the city's Director of Parks and Recreation, contracted security services
personnel, or any authorized city employee, may enforce this chapter. The
Director of Parks and Recreation or designee shall have the authority to
regulate the activities in park areas, when necessary, to prevent congestion,
secure the safety and health of patrons, and to secure maximum use of the park
facilities for the comfort and convenience of all. In addition, the Director or
designee, may limit the length of time such facilities, including picnic
facilities are used to avoid crowding. Visitors shall comply with any
directions given to achieve this end.
(Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15)
§ 94.14 NOTICE.
   The city shall cause this chapter and any other park rules and regulations
to be posted at each city park to give park patrons notice of park rules and
regulations.
(Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise classified as a misdemeanor in this code, the
violation of any provision or failure to comply with any mandatory requirement
of this chapter is an infraction.
   (B)   Unless otherwise noted, any person violating these provisions shall be
guilty of an infraction, which shall be punishable by:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the first offense;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of the same
offense within one year of the first offense; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of the same
offense thereafter.
   (C)   An issued Administrative Citation under this chapter may be changed to
a warning citation at the discretion of the Director of Parks and Recreation
and with the approval of the City Manager. Any further violation of the same
offense shall invoke the penalties of a fine.
(`67 Code, § 3-11-10) (Ord. 99-02, passed 3-8-99; Am. Ord. 2011-003, passed 6-
27-11; Am. Ord. 2015-011, passed 6-23-15)
CHAPTER 95: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Obstructing streets
   
95.02   Sharp substances in streets
   
95.03   Obstructing sidewalks
News Rack Regulations
   
95.20   Definition
   
95.21   Encroachment, interference prohibited
   
95.22   Standards prescribed
   
95.23   Information required on new rack
   
95.24   Removal authorized
   
95.25   Alternative procedure
Encroachment Permits
   
95.35   Purpose
   
95.36   Definitions
   
95.37   Permit required
   
95.38   Application for permit
   
95.39   Time of issuance of permit
   
95.40   Compliance required
   
95.41   Emergency work
   
95.42   Temporary closing of public ways
   
95.43   Restoration of improvements
   
95.44   Preservation of monuments
   
95.45   Approval authority
   
95.46   Fees
   
95.47   Security required
   
95.48   Insurance requirement
   
95.49   Indemnity and litigation cost
   
95.50   Public districts, utilities, or subdivision
   
95.51   Infractions
   
95.52   Franchise required
   
95.53   Removal or cure of illegal encroachments
   
95.54   Completion of improvements
   
95.55   Acceptance of improvements
   
95.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Driving on sidewalks, see §
70.04
   Street improvements, see §§ 150.55 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
   (A)   Obstruction prohibited. It shall be deemed a misdemeanor to obstruct
any street or alley within the city by leaving or allowing to remain in such
street or alley any wagon, truck, dray, automobile, float or other vehicle, or
by placing or allowing to remain in any such street or alley anything of a
large or bulky nature which may obstruct the free passage through the street or
alley.
(`67 Code, § 7-10-1)
   (B)   Exception. This shall not apply to cases where lumber or other
building material or building appliances are placed in such street or alley for
the purpose of erecting, altering or repairing any building or structure
located upon adjoining property, provided, however, that in such cases,
materials or appliances shall be placed so as to offer the least possible
obstruction to the free passage of such street or alley, and provided further
that any such material or appliance shall be placed or stored as directed by
the Public Works Director.
   (C)   Block parties.
      (1)   A block party or similar event is defined for these purposes as a
street closure not exceeding one city block on other than arterial or collector
streets. The event must be sponsored only by such owners/residents/tenants, and
not be for commercial or advertising purpose or profit.
      (2)   The purpose of this section is to establish appropriate and safe
conditions, in which the city will issue residents a permit to close streets
for the purpose of a block party.
      (3)   All street closures within city limits must be approved through the
permit process. Applicants must have permits into the Sheriff's Department no
later than 20 working days prior to the event. The permit will be issued or
denied within five working days of the event. There is a $30 non-refundable
application fee that must accompany the application submittal. Applicant must
provide Certificate of Insurance with submittal.
      (4)   Scope: All block party permits must meet the following conditions:
         (a)   The closure of a street for block parties must pertain only to
local residential streets;
         (b)   The city requires 12 feet of clear and unobstructed access to be
maintained for emergency vehicles. During the time of the block party, the
street must be blocked off with approved Type II barricades at each end of the
street, or in the case of a cul-de-sac, only at the entrance, with the required
12 foot access. The city will not furnish barricades;
         (c)   The event will only occur between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:
00 midnight of the day of the event;
         (d)   Adult supervision must be provided at all times;
         (e)   The city will not be held responsible for any injuries,
accidents, or liabilities that might occur during the party;
         (f)   The city's noise ordinance is enforced on a complaint basis.
Block party permits provide no waiver to the noise ordinance;
         (g)   Clean up shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
Applicants must provide for the collection and removal of all trash, garbage,
and litter caused by or arising out of the event. If city crews are required to
provide this service, a $250 charge shall be assessed to the applicant;
         (h)   Event activities shall not create a public or private nuisance
or an undue hazard or disturbance to the public peace, tranquility, health,
welfare, safety, or morals, or create an excessive burden on police or fire or
other public operations;
         (i)   A Certificate of Insurance for $1,000,000 that includes an
endorsement naming the City of Riverbank, its officers, employees, agents, and
volunteers as additional insured is required at the time you submit your
application;
         (j)   Approval will be subject to all other city ordinances and
governmental restrictions. Applicants and all event participants must comply
with all other applicable city, county, state, and federal regulations;
         (k)   Signatures from 80% of all households within the closure area
indicating their consent must be submitted with the application;
         (l)   Applications must be submitted at least 20 working days prior to
the event;
         (m)   Incomplete or improperly completed applications will not be
processed;
         (n)   Applications will be routed to both the Fire and Public Works
Departments for approval;
         (o)   You will receive approval/denial notification at least five
working days prior to the event. The notice will be your permit;
         (p)   You must post the permit in a conspicuous place during the
event.
(`67 Code, § 7-10-2) (Am. Ord. 2004-009, passed 10-25-04)
§ 95.02 SHARP SUBSTANCES IN STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place in any public street or alley
any glass or other sharp substances likely to wound the feet of animals or
puncture the tires of any vehicle passing along the same.
(`67 Code, § 7-10-4) (Ord. 6, passed 10-2-22)
§ 95.03 OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful and constitutes an infraction for any person to:
   (A)   Ride or drive a horse or team upon a sidewalk except as may be
necessary to enter or leave adjacent property.
   (B)   Operate, move or park a bicycle upon a sidewalk which has a “no bike”
or “no bicycle” notice painted or posted thereon, except to enter or leave
adjacent property.
(Ord. 70-11, passed 8-10-70)
   (C)   To ride on a skateboard upon a city walk which has a “No Skateboards”
notice painted or posted thereon.
(Ord. 77-24, passed 10-25-77)
   (D)   To deposit or cause to be deposited upon a sidewalk any obstruction,
except that paper, garbage, trash and/or rubbish may be deposited at the curb
pursuant to Chapter 50 of the City Code after 5:00 p.m. of a day immediately
prior to the day scheduled for garbage collection. As used in this division,
the term OBSTRUCTION shall mean any object which impedes or interferes with
pedestrian traffic. Notwithstanding the provisions of this division (D) to the
contrary, the City Clerk may, upon written application therefor, grant
permission on a day to day basis to any person to place objects in the nature
of obstructions on sidewalks, provided that the objects are not unsightly or
dangerous and will provide a service or benefit to the public generally.
(Ord. 86-11, passed 5-12-86)
(`67 Code, § 7-10-5)
NEWS RACK REGULATIONS
§ 95.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NEWS RACK. Any device which contains, holds, carries, or dispenses
newspapers or other periodicals or which is designed to contain, hold, carry,
or dispense newspapers or other periodicals.
(`67 Code, § 3-12-7) (Ord. 86-13, passed 5-27-86)
§ 95.21 ENCROACHMENT, INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall install, use or maintain any news rack which projects
onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which
rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of a roadway.
(`67 Code, § 3-12-1)
   (B)   No person shall install, use or maintain any news rack which in whole
or in part rests upon, in or over any sidewalk or parkway, when such
installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property,
or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public
transportation purposes or other government use, or when such news rack
unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, the ingress into or egress from any residence, place of business, or
any legally parked or stopped vehicle, or the use of poles, posts, traffic
signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near
the location, or when such news rack interferes with the cleaning of any
sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery.
(`67 Code, § 3-12-2)
§ 95.22 STANDARDS PRESCRIBED.
   Any news rack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any sidewalk
or parkway, shall comply with the following standards:
   (A)   No news rack shall exceed five feet in height, 30 inches in width, or
two feet in depth.
   (B)   News racks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to the wall of
a building. News racks placed near the curb shall be placed no less than 18
inches nor more than 24 inches from the edge of the curb. News racks placed
adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and
not more than six inches from the wall. No news racks shall be placed or
maintained on a sidewalk or parkway opposite a news stand or other news rack.
   (C)   No news rack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any
property not owned by the owner of the news rack or to any permanently fixed
object.
   (D)   News racks may be chained or otherwise attached to one another;
however, no more than three news racks may be joined together in this manner,
and a space of no less than 18 inches shall separate each group of three racks
so attached.
   (E)   No news rack, or group of attached news racks allowed under division
(D) hereof, shall weigh, in the aggregate, in excess of 125 pounds when empty.
   (F)   No news rack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
      (1)   Within three feet of any marked crosswalk.
      (2)   Within 15 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
      (3)   Within three feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call
box or other emergency facility.
      (4)   Within three feet of any driveway.
      (5)   Within three feet ahead of, and 15 feet to the rear of any sign
marking a designated bus stop.
      (6)   Within three feet of any bus bench.
      (7)   At any location whereby the clear space for the passage way of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet.
      (8)   Within three feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs
or trees or within three feet of any display window of any building abutting
the sidewalk or parkway in such manner as to impede or interfere with the
reasonable use of such window for display purposes.
   (G)   No news rack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than that dealing with the display, sale, or purchase of the newspaper or
news periodically sold therein.
   (H)   Each news rack shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and
in good repair at all times.
(`67 Code, § 3-12-3)
§ 95.23 INFORMATION REQUIRED ON NEWS RACK.
   Every person who places or maintains a news rack on the streets of the city
shall have his name, address, and telephone number affixed thereto in a place
where such information may be easily seen.
(`67 Code, § 3-12-4)
§ 95.24 REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   Any news rack, as the term is defined herein, installed, used or maintained
in violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter may be removed
pursuant to the provisions of this section. Prior to the removal, the Director
of Public Works shall mail or otherwise deliver to the owner of the news rack a
notice setting forth the location of the news rack, describing the violation,
and giving the owner not less than five but not more than ten days within which
to either correct the violation or request an informal hearing before the City
Manager to contest the removal. In the event the owner of the news rack neither
corrects the violation nor requests an informal hearing within the time
specified in the notice, the Director of Public Works shall immediately
thereafter cause the removal of said news rack and shall store it in any
convenient place. In the event the owner of the news rack requests a hearing,
the City Manager shall hold the hearing within five days after receiving any
such request. If the City Manager finds that the news rack described in the
notice is not in compliance with the requirements of §
95.22, he may order its immediate removal. The Director of Public Works shall
thereafter cause the removal of the news rack and shall store it in any
convenient place. Within five days after making any removal authorized by this
section, the Director of Public Works shall take reasonable steps to notify the
owner of the news rack of the fact of its removal, the place of its storage,
and of the fact that unless the rack is claimed within 45 days, and the costs
of the pickup as fixed by the Director of Public Works paid, that the rack will
be deemed abandoned and will be destroyed. Upon failure of the owner to claim
such news rack and pay such costs as fixed by the Director of Public Works
within 45 days after such notice has been sent to the owner, such news rack
shall be deemed to have been abandoned by the owner, and to be abandoned
property, and the news rack and its contents, except the money, shall be
destroyed by representatives of the Director of Public Works. Any money
contained in any news rack so destroyed shall be held in the official custody
of the Finance Director of the City for a period of three years and handled
pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §§ 50050 et seq.
(`67 Code, § 3-12-5)
§ 95.25 ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE.
   In the case of violations of this subchapter relative to restrictions upon
attachments of news racks to property other than that owned by the owner of the
news rack, to fixed objects or each other, and upon location of news racks, the
Director of Public Works, or his authorized representatives, may, as an
alternative to the removal procedures set forth in
§ 95.24, remove such attachment and/or move such rack or racks in order to
restore them to a legal condition.
(`67 Code, § 3-12-6)
ENCROACHMENT PERMITS
§ 95.35 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to define, specify, regulate, and control
the design and improvement of public works facilities, both on and off site,
and other construction requirements imposed as conditions of acceptance, or the
approval or conditional approval of land development by use permit or building
permit, or other public works permits, and all other procedures and processes
wherein public or private improvements, construction, and improvement or
construction plans are required as a condition prior to city approval. The
requirements to construct these improvements may be deferred as described in §
150.56 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following words shall have the
meanings set forth in this section:
   ENCROACHMENT. Any type of construction or work or the placing of any object
or thing, whether permanent or temporary, within a public right-of-way.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, association, corporation,
public district, or other political subdivision.
   PUBLIC STREET. Any public right-of-way, highway, street, sidewalk, easement,
or other area or thoroughfare, whether improved or unimproved, which is owned
by or under the control of the city.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.37 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to perform any type of construction, or to
place an encroachment of any kind within the public street right-of-way without
first having obtained an encroachment permit to do so from the Public Works
Director.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.38 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person desiring to perform construction of any kind or nature across or
along any public street shall make application to the Public Works Director for
a permit therefore. Every applicant shall comply with the Encroachment Permit
Administrative Procedures, which can be obtained from the Department of Public
Works.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.39 TIME OF ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   Permits required by this subchapter shall be secured at least five working
days prior to the time the work under such permit is proposed; except, where an
emergency street cut is to be performed, the applicant shall immediately give
prior notice thereof to the city Police Services Department and Stanislaus
Consolidated Fire Protection District, and shall secure or make a reasonable
effort to secure the consent to perform such work from the Public Works
Director.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.40 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Any act done under the authority of a written permit issued pursuant to §
95.37 shall be done in accordance with the applicable provisions of this
subchapter and the terms and conditions of such permit.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.41 EMERGENCY WORK.
   Any person may excavate within a public street right-of-way for the purpose
of making repairs in cases of emergency requiring immediate action. In such
cases, the Public Works Director shall be promptly notified of any such action,
and such person at his own expense shall immediately replace such public street
right-of-way in a condition equal or better to that existing before excavation.
Such restoration shall be in accordance with standards established by the
Public Works Director.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.42 TEMPORARY CLOSING OF PUBLIC WAYS.
   The Public Works Director may grant written permission to close or cause to
be closed for limited periods of time any city streets, alleys, driveways, or
areas not under control of the State Department of Transportation, if in the
opinion of the Public Works Director, the public interest can best be served
thereby.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.43 RESTORATION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Curbs, gutters, sidewalks, sewers, drains, structures, conduits, cables, and
all other improvements damaged, disturbed, or removed during the progress of
the work shall be restored or replaced to as good or better condition than
existed prior to work performed by permittee in accordance with the standard
specifications of the city and to the satisfaction of the Public Works
Director.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.44 PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS.
   Any monument of concrete, iron, or other lasting material set for the
purpose of locating or preserving the lines and/or elevation of any public
street or right-of-way, property, subdivision, or a precise point or reference
point shall not be removed or disturbed, without first obtaining written
permission from the Public Works Director to do so. Replacement of removed or
disturbed monuments will be at the expense of the permittee.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.45 APPROVAL AUTHORITY.
   The Public Works Director or his or her authorized representative shall
inspect and approve for city acceptance any work completed under the permits
issued under provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.46 FEES.
   (A)   Any person working within the city right-of-way must obtain an
encroachment permit from the Development Services Department.
   (B)   A fee shall be charged for each permit issued pursuant to this
subchapter. The fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of any permit. The fee
for the permit shall be established by the City Council via resolution, and can
be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord. 2014-015, passed 12-9-14)
§ 95.47 SECURITY REQUIRED.
   Each applicant for an encroachment permit shall be required to deposit a
security with the city, in the form of a security bond, cash deposit, savings
and loan certificate, or letter of credit in an amount determined by the Public
Works Director to be 100% of the estimated cost of the work to be performed
under the encroachment permit. The security shall guarantee:
   (A)   The faithful performance of all terms and conditions of the permit;
and
   (B)   That for a period of one year after completion the public street shall
be free from defect.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.48 INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   In addition to the requirements provided in §§
95.38 and
95.42, and before issuance of a permit under the provisions of this subchapter,
the Public Works Director shall require each applicant to file with the city,
certificates of insurance and endorsement provided by the Public Works
Director, evidencing possession of general liability, automobile, and worker's
compensation insurance coverage in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000 each
occurrence on account of bodily injuries, including death, or on account of
property damage, to cover the liability of the permittee for property damage
and injury to persons in connection with the work sought to be done under the
permit, except that an applicant seeking to work behind the public street curb
adjacent to premises containing only one single-family dwelling which is owned
and occupied or will be occupied upon completion of construction by the
applicant shall be required to be filed with city, certificates of insurance
and endorsements evidencing possession of general liability and property damage
coverage in the minimum amount of $100,000 per occurrence on account of bodily
injuries including death, or on account of property damage and injuries to
persons in connection with work sought to be done on the permit.
   (B)   The certificates of insurance and endorsements shall be in a form
approved and provided by the Public Works Director and shall provide 30-days
advance notice to the city of its cancellation or expirations and shall further
evidence that the applicant has, except as to the worker's compensation
insurance coverage, the City of Riverbank, its officers, agents, and employees
are named as additional insured on the applicant's policies of insurance.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.49 INDEMNITY AND LITIGATION COST.
   (A)   The permittee specifically obligates himself and agrees to protect,
hold free and harmless, defend and indemnify the city, its officers, employees,
and agents from any and all liability, penalties, costs, losses, damages,
expense, causes of action, claims or judgments, including attorney's fees,
which arise out of or are in any way connected with the permittee's, his
contractor's or his subcontractor's or supplier's performance of work under the
permit
   (B)   In any and all claims against the city, its officers, employees, and
agents by any employee of the permittee, his contractor, any subcontractor,
anyone directly or indirectly employed by any one of them, or anyone for whose
acts any of them may be liable, the indemnification obligation under this
subchapter shall not be limited in any way by any limitation on the amount or
type of damages, compensation, or benefits payable by or for the contractor or
any subcontractor under worker's compensation statutes, disability benefit
statutes, or other employee benefit statutes.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.50 PUBLIC DISTRICTS, UTILITIES, OR SUBDIVISION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, the requirements of §§
95.43 and
95.44 shall not be required of any public corporation, public utility
corporations, or political subdivision which is authorized by law to establish
or maintain any works or facilities in, under, or over any public street, nor
shall the application of any permittee of the class specified in this section
be denied. Each applicant is entitled to a permit, but is otherwise subject to
the provisions of this subchapter and to all conditions and provisions made by
the Public Works Director in any such permit.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.51 INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director and other authorized
employees of the city, to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. The lack
of enforcement by the Public Works Director, or any authorized assistants of
any official, or employee of the city vested with the duty or authority to
issue permits, shall not legalize, authorize, waive, or excuse the violation of
any provision of this subchapter.
   (B)   In the administration and enforcement of this subchapter, any duly
authorized official or employee of the city shall have the authority to enter
upon the premises for the purpose of investigation and inspection. No person
shall refuse to permit such inspection.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.52 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   No encroachment permit shall be issued to any person, for the purposes of
installation in the public right-of-way, any communication, electric, heat,
gas, or transportation service whatsoever or for whatever purpose, unless that
person shall have first obtained a franchise to maintain such service from the
city.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.53 REMOVAL OR CURE OF ILLEGAL ENCROACHMENTS.
   The Public Works Director, and/or Chief of Police (or their designees) are
authorized to remove or cure illegal encroachments in the public street right-
of-way in accordance with this section.
   (A)   Notice. Where possible notice to remove or cure illegal encroachments
shall be given to the owner or other responsible person allowing a reasonable
time for such person to remove the encroachment.
   (B)   Removal by city. Where notice is not possible because the owner is
unknown or unavailable, or where the owner or other responsible person fails to
remove or cure the encroachment after notice, the encroachment shall be removed
or cured by the city. If reasonably possible, any object or thing removed from
the public street right-of-way pursuant to this section because it was
encroaching shall be held for three days to allow the owner to claim it. If the
owner fails to claim it, or if it is not reasonably possible to store it, the
object or thing shall be disposed of.
   (C)   Costs. The actual cost of cure of or removal, storage, and disposal of
encroachments shall be charged against the owner of the encroachment or the
person causing such encroachment. No object or thing removed because it was
encroaching shall be released pursuant to this section except upon payment of
such cost.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.54 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Completion.
      (1)   The applicant shall complete required improvements before final
building inspection or the issuance of an occupancy permit.
      (2)   If the applicant fails to complete the required improvements within
the specified time, the Public Works Director may, at his or her option, cause
the uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the
performance security shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary
costs.
   (B)   Extensions.
      (1)   The Public Works Director may extend the completion date upon
written request by the applicant and the submittal of adequate evidence to
justify the extension. The request shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration of the building permit or encroachment permit.
      (2)   The developer shall pay the costs incurred by the city in
processing the extension request and extension agreement.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.55 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   When the developer has completed all improvements, corrected all
deficiencies, and submitted record drawings of the improvements, the city shall
consider the improvements for acceptance.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of §§
95.35 through
95.55 shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable in accordance
with this Code.
(Ord. 2008-002, passed 3-10-08)
CHAPTER 96: TREES
Section
   
96.01   Title
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Street tree plan
   
96.04   Plan administration
   
96.05   Authority of City Manager
   
96.06   Planting generally
   
96.07   Permits required
   
96.08   Abusing or mutilating trees prohibited
   
96.09   Open ground maintenance
   
96.10   Interference prohibited
   
96.11   Building construction necessitating, altering, or removing tree; permit
and deposit required
   
96.12   Private tree maintenance; failure a nuisance; notice
   
96.13   Planting in new subdivisions; plan and deposit submission
   
96.14   Emergency situations; public utilities may trim without permit
   
96.15   Changing the variety of approved trees; procedure
   
96.16   Liability of property owner
   
96.17   Responsibility of property owner or occupant
   
96.18   Appeal from decision
   
96.19   Penalty for violations; civil action
   
96.20   Dangerous trees, mistletoe a nuisance
Cross-reference:
   Oak and landmark tree preservation, see
Ch. 156
§ 96.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Street Tree Ordinance
of the City of Riverbank”
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, and words
shall have the meaning given herein:
   APPROVED TREES. Means trees planted and growing in accordance with the
street tree plan, both as to variety and location. All other street trees shall
be known as “nonconforming trees.”
   STREET TREES. Means all trees planted or growing within public rights-of-
way, public easements, streets, parking strips, roads and ways within the city.
The locations herein referred to shall be known as “street tree areas.”
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.03 STREET TREE PLAN.
   (A)   The Development Services Department may prepare a street tree plan
specifying a list of approved street trees, a uniform method of street tree
planning, and designating certain streets or blocks of certain specimens of
trees, plants or shrubs. The street tree plan shall subsequently be reviewed by
the Planning Commission.
   (B)   The plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and after
adoption of the plan, as submitted or modified, in accordance with law it shall
become the street tree plan of the city.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.04 PLAN ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Manager shall have the authority and powers to administer the
street tree program in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.05 AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager shall have the authority to order any work to prune, trim,
clip, spray, maintain and care for street trees, or private trees to the extent
that they overhang or project within public rights-of-way, or public roads of
the city, as needed, to remove or require the removal by the owner of the
adjoining property of diseased or dead trees, and encourage planting of
approved trees throughout the city. The City Manager shall also have the
authority to deviate from the designated tree for each block if circumstances
warrant. Street tree pruning and tree removals shall be done in accordance with
the street tree policy approved by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.06 PLANTING GENERALLY.
   (A)   Upon the adoption of a street tree plan, all street trees shall
hereafter be planted in accordance therewith and the provisions of this
chapter. At the property owner’s request and cost, the city will remove and
replace existing, non-conforming street trees with an approved tree.
   (B)   Each interior residential lot shall have at least one approved street
tree. Each corner residential lot shall have at least two approved street
trees. The City Manager may, in his or her discretion, approve a greater or
lesser number of trees per lot, upon a review of the circumstances.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.07 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to remove, damage, prune, or encroach
upon, or cause to be removed, damaged, pruned, or encroached upon any street
tree without first having obtained a permit from the Public Works Department.
Said permit shall be issued only for work to be done in compliance with the
street tree plan and this chapter. The City Council may establish and set from
time to time a fee for such permits. All work done pursuant to a permit shall
be completed under the supervision of the Public Works Department. Whenever any
street tree, whether approved or nonconforming, is removed or needs replacing,
it must be replaced with a tree approved for that specific street tree area in
accordance with the street tree plan and the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Manager shall issue to any
person doing business as a public utility, subject to the jurisdiction of the
California Public Utilities Commission and holding a valid franchise, a permit
which shall authorize the cutting or removal of trees necessary for the safety
and proper maintenance of said utilities service pursuant to the orders, rules
and regulations of said California Public Utilities Commission. Such a permit,
unless renewed, shall expire at the end of one year after the date of issuance,
or it may be revoked for good cause. Even with a valid permit, utilities are
prohibited from topping street trees. Directional pruning or other ISA-approved
methods are allowed. The city’s pruning guidelines are contained in the city’s
street tree pruning policy.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.08 ABUSING OR MUTILATING TREES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall abuse, destroy or mutilate any street tree. Topping, severe
pruning, or other inappropriate pruning techniques shall be considered
mutilation. Directional pruning or other ISA-approved methods of pruning are
allowed and do not constitute mutilation. Any such harm to street trees
constitutes an immediate hazard to the public health, safety and welfare of the
community and a public nuisance. Upon notice by the city, any person who
violates the provisions of this section to the extent that the street tree must
be removed or replaced, shall remove and replace the tree to the specifications
of the street tree plan and the provisions of this chapter at their own
expense. At the owner’s request and cost, the city may provide a tree to the
property owner who shall be responsible for all planting and associated work.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.09 OPEN GROUND MAINTENANCE.
   No person shall place or maintain any stone, cement, or other substance as
to impede the free access of water or air to the roots of any street tree; not
less than twelve square feet of open ground shall be left and maintained around
every street tree.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.10 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall in any way interfere with the City Manager, other city
employees, or their contractors while they are lawfully engaged in planting,
mulching, pruning, trimming, spraying, treating or removing any street tree, or
in removing any stone, cement or other substance from the trunk of any street
tree or the surrounding open ground area.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.11 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION NECESSITATING, ALTERING, OR REMOVING TREE; PERMIT
AND DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
   A written permit issued by the Public Works Department shall be obtained
when the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building, house or
structure necessitates the trimming, pruning, or removal of any street tree.
The City Council shall set from time to time by resolution a permit fee for
such permits. As a condition to a permit granted pursuant to this section, the
applicant shall deposit a security with the city, in an amount to be determined
by the City Manager, sufficient to defray the cost of replacing the removed
tree with an approved tree in conformance with the street tree plan.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.12 PRIVATE TREE MAINTENANCE; FAILURE A NUISANCE; NOTICE.
   No person shall allow or maintain any tree on private property in such a way
that creates a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic by obstructing vision
or impairing necessary clearance, or in any manner endangering the security or
usefulness of any public street, sewer, sidewalk, or other public property. Any
such private tree allowed or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
section is a public nuisance; upon a determination by the City Manager that
such private tree constitutes a nuisance, he shall give written notice to the
owner of the property upon which said nuisance exists to trim, remove, or
otherwise control such tree in such a manner as will abate such nuisance.
Failure to comply with such written notice within ten days thereafter is a
violation of this section. Such written notice may be given by a personal
service of a copy thereof, or by placing a copy of the notice in the United
States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner of the property as shown
by the last assessment roll of the city.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.13 PLANTING IN NEW SUBDIVISIONS; PLAN AND DEPOSIT SUBMISSION.
   (A)   With or before the filing of any final map of any new subdivision, the
subdivider shall either file with the Development Services Department a
proposed plan of street tree planting showing the location and variety of trees
proposed to be planted in the subdivision, or shall request the Planning
Commission to designate the type and location of street trees for such
subdivision before approval of the final subdivision map.
   (B)   Subdividers are required to deposit a security, to be determined by
the City Manager, sufficient to cover the cost of the number and variety of
trees needed as determined by the Development Services Department for planting
street trees within their subdivisions. Prior to the approval of the final
subdivision map by the City Council, the deposit shall have been either paid or
guaranteed by the subdividers bond.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.14 EMERGENCY SITUATIONS; PUBLIC UTILITIES MAY TRIM WITHOUT PERMIT.
   Public utilities providing gas, water, electric, telephone or telegraph
service to residents of the city may, in those emergency cases where street
trees are interrupting the service, trim or remove branches of the trees to the
extent necessary to restore services without securing a permit. However, once
the emergency situation has been corrected, the public utility must finish the
trimming through the use of directional pruning, v-pruning or other approved
methods to leave the tree with a correct structure and a balanced shape.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.15 CHANGING THE VARIETY OF APPROVED TREES; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   In the event that any approved trees become subject to pests or
otherwise unsuitable as street trees, the owners of not less than 50% of the
front footage on any block and not less than 50% of the frontage of the block
facing the same on the opposite side of the street may apply to the Planning
Commission for change in the variety of approved trees on such block. “Block”
means the block fronting on any street between cross streets. The Planning
Commission shall schedule and conduct a hearing upon receipt of such notice. At
least ten days prior to the hearing, the City Clerk shall provide
written notice of the hearing to the owners of lands on the block to be
affected by such proposed change by mail to the addresses shown on the current
assessment roll and may publish a notice of the hearing at least once in a
newspaper published in the city. At the hearing the Planning Commission shall
hear the evidence presented and shall take into consideration the effect of the
change on the general tree planting program of the city. The Planning
Commission shall issue a written decision, which the City Clerk shall be mail
to all affected property owners as defined herein.
   (B)   Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the Planning Commission
may appeal the same to the City Council within ten days after notice of such
decision. The City Council shall consider such appeal at its next regular
meeting or at such time as it may be continued, and its decision shall be
final.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.16 LIABILITY OF PROPERTY OWNER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability
upon the city, its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of any
private property from the duty to keep any tree, shrub, or plant upon any
street tree area on his property or under his control in such condition as to
prevent it from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon
any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place within the
city.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.17 RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNER OR OCCUPANT.
   The property owner or occupant, as the case may be, shall be responsible for
maintaining and otherwise watering street trees located in rights-of-way or
easements abutting the property.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.18 APPEAL FROM DECISION.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, appeals from any
direction or order given or made under the provisions of this chapter may
follow the procedures set forth in this code for a hearing by a Hearing Officer
or the Appeals Board.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.19 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS; CIVIL ACTION.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty
of an infraction punishable by a warning on the first offense, a fine of $100
on the second offense, and a fine of $250 on the third offense and a fine of
$500 on the fourth and subsequent offenses thereafter.
   (B)   The city may enforce any of the provisions of this chapter through
nuisance abatement or any other administrative remedies available under this
code.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-11-17)
§ 96.20 DANGEROUS TREES, MISTLETOE A NUISANCE.
   (A)   Any tree or shrub growing in a street tree area or public place which
is endangering or which in any way may endanger the security or usefulness of
any public street, sidewalk or other public place or the full and safe
operation of public utility wires, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the
City Manager may cause the same to be trimmed or removed. In the case of any
such trees or shrubs in the private property portion of the street tree area,
the City Manager shall notify the owner, or the duly authorized agent, in
writing that such tree or shrub is a nuisance and should be trimmed or removed.
Failure of the property owner or his duly authorized agent to remove or trim
such tree or shrub within 30 days after receipt of the notice by the Manager
shall be a violation of this chapter, and the Manager, may then remove or trim
the tree or shrub and assess the cost against the property owner.
   (B)   Mistletoe growing in any tree in the city is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. The Manager may cause mistletoe growing in any tree in the street
tree areas to be removed. In the case of mistletoe growing on trees on private
property portion of the street tree area, the Manager, or their duly authorized
representative, shall notify the owner, or their duly authorized agent, in
writing that such mistletoe is a nuisance and should be removed. Failure of the
property owner to remove or to have such mistletoe removed, within 35 days from
the date of the notice shall be in violation of this chapter and the City
Manager may then remove, or cause to be removed such mistletoe and the cost of
removal shall be assessed against the property owner.
(Ord. 2019-002, passed 1-22-2019)
CHAPTER 97: WEED CONTROL; SANITARY REGULATIONS
Section
Garbage, Rubbish, and Weed Control
   
97.01   Short title
   
97.02   Definitions
   
97.03   Noxious growth, rubbish, garbage prohibited
   
97.04   Order and notice requiring removal
   
97.05   Form of notice
   
97.06   Abatement by city; costs to be special assessment and lien; collection
   
97.07   Right of entry
   
97.08   Procedure not exclusive
Sanitary Regulations
   
97.20   Application
   
97.21   Enforcement
   
97.22   Nuisance defined
   
97.23   Hauling of objectionable substances
   
97.24   Tightly covered receptacles
   
97.25   Hog manure
   
97.26   Mosquito breeding
   
97.27   Vermin
   
97.28   Gas, fumes, dust, smoke and odors
   
97.29   Vacant buildings
   
97.30   Dead animals
GARBAGE, RUBBISH, AND WEED CONTROL
§ 97.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the Garbage, Rubbish and Weed
Control Ordinance of the city.
(`67 Code, § 4-7-1)
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms, phrases and words
and their derivation shall have the meanings given herein unless the context
indicates that a different meaning is intended.
   BRUSH. Branches of trees sheared therefrom, a thicket of shrubs, or bushes.
   DIRT. Any artificial accumulation of earth of a size, shape, or composition
to constitute a hazard to the health or safety of the community.
   GARBAGE. Accumulations of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter, liquid, or
otherwise, that attend the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of
meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable. (See also §
50.01 of this code.)
   LOT. Any lot, parcel, tract, or piece of land, improved or unimproved,
including the sidewalk area abutting or adjoining the lot, parcel, tract, or
piece of land; and the parkways or areas lying between the curbline and the
street line of the adjoining or abutting lot, bounded on the sides by the
prolongations in straight lines of the side lines of the lot in front of which
such parkway or area exists.
   NOXIOUS GROWTH. Weeds, vines or brush which bear seeds of a wingy or downy
nature or which contain a high growth as to become a fire menace when dry, or
which contain poisonous oils that become dangerous to the life and health of
the community. Poison oak and poison ivy shall be deemed to be a noxious growth
when the conditions of growth are such as to constitute a menace to the public
health of the community.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed
or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibule belonging
or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other
public ways and any and all public squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings.
   RUBBISH. Scrap metals, junk, disassembled parts of automobiles or machinery,
construction or demolition materials, debris, litter, paper, cardboard, metal
cans, glass, cut brush, dead trees, tree limbs, similar materials, or any other
flammable materials.
(`67 Code, § 4-7-2) (Ord. 86-12, passed 5-12-86)
§ 97.03 NOXIOUS GROWTH, RUBBISH, GARBAGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person owning, managing, or having control or charge or occupancy
of any lot or private premises shall:
      (1)   Allow noxious growths otherwise dangerous to the life, health,
comfort, or convenience of the community to grow or remain upon such lot or
private premises.
      (2)   Sow or disseminate, or allow or permit to mature, any noxious
growth upon such lot or private premises.
      (3)   Suffer or permit any weeds, grass, rank growth or brush to grow or
exist in excess of six inches above the grade in the area of growth.
      (4)   Cause or permit rubbish, garbage or dirt to be placed or to exist
upon such lot or private property.
   (B)   It is the duty of every such person to prevent such growth, existence,
or keeping. Each of the above conditions is declared to be detrimental to the
public health, safety or general welfare and thus constitutes a public
nuisance. To establish a prima facie violation of this section, it shall not be
necessary to establish any facts except that the accused person owned, managed
or had charge, control or occupancy of a lot or private premised wherein such
condition existed or occurred.
(`67 Code, § 4-7-3)
§ 97.04 ORDER AND NOTICE REQUIRING REMOVAL.
   (A)   If and when it shall appear that any condition described in §
97.03 of this subchapter exists on any lot or private premises, the Director of
Public Works or his authorized agent may direct the abatement and/or removal
thereof and cause notices to be posted upon or in front of such property to the
effect that such weeds, vines, shrubs, brush, rubbish, or dirt, must be removed
within ten days from and after the date of such posting. Such notices shall be
conspicuously posted on or in front of the property on or in front of which the
condition exists as follows:
      (1)   One notice shall be posted on or in front of each separately owned
parcel.
      (2)   Not more than two notices shall be posted to any 50 feet to 100
feet frontage.
      (3)   Notices shall be placed at intervals not more than 100 feet, if the
frontage of a parcel is greater than 100 feet, with one notice for each 100
feet of frontage.
   (B)   In addition to posting such notices, the Director of Public Works or
his authorized agent shall send a similar notice to the owner of the subject
property as shown upon any fee record, or upon the last equalized assessment
roll by United States mail; but the failure of the owner to receive such a
notice shall not affect the power of the city or any of its officers or
employees to proceed as provided herein.
(`67 Code, § 4-7-4) (Ord. 87-16, passed 9-14-86)
§ 97.05 FORM OF NOTICE.
   (A)   The headings of the notices required shall be in substantially the
following form in letters not less than one inch in height:
   NOTICE TO CLEAN PREMISES
   NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN to the owner, manager, occupant or persons having
charge or control of the property located at (describe property—for example an
address, assessor's parcel number, physical description) that the condition(s)
of (describe violation,[s]) exists upon the property which is/are in violation
of the provisions of §§
97.01 through
97.08 of the Riverbank City Code, which provides for the elimination of
rubbish, garbage, weeds, dirt, noxious or dangerous growths, growing upon or
accumulated upon or in front of property, obstructing the use of sidewalks,
parkways, or streets or which constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of
the community.
   The said condition(s) must be abated on or before _______________, 19/20___
. If not abated on or before said date, the City of Riverbank may abate the
condition or cause it to be abated and the costs thereof will be assessed
against the land and become a lien thereon.
   Any person objecting to the abatement work specified in this notice may
appeal by filing a written statement of such objection, specifying the address,
or description of the property concerned, the reasons for objection, and the
name, address, phone number (if any) and status (owner, manager, tenant, lessee
or other) of the person making the objection. All such statements must be filed
with the City Clerk of the City of Riverbank, City Hall, Riverbank, California,
not later than the date for abatement set forth hereinabove.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such written statement, the City Clerk will set such
matter upon the agenda of the City Council and objectors will be notified by
mail of the time and place of the meeting at which the City Council will hear
and consider such objections. Such meeting shall not be sooner than three days
after the mailing of such notices.
   (C)   At the time stated in the notice(s) the City Council shall hear and
consider all objections to the proposed abatement work. The City Council may
continue the hearing from time to time. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
City Council may allow or overrule any objections. The decision of the City
Council is final. If the objection is overruled, the objector shall have five
days thereafter to perform the abatement work. If the work is not performed
within that time, the Director of Public Works or his authorized agent shall
proceed as hereinafter set forth in
§ 97.06(A) of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 4-7-5)
§ 97.06 ABATEMENT BY CITY; COSTS TO BE SPECIAL ASSESSMENT AND LIEN; COLLECTION.
   (A)   If, at the end of the period mentioned in the notice, the owner has
failed to perform the abatement work required in the notice, the Director of
Public Works or his authorized agent shall cause such work to be performed, and
shall report the expense of the work to the Finance Director. The Finance
Director shall charge the expense of such work to the owner. If the owner fails
or refuses to pay the amount of the expense within the period of 30 days after
being billed therefor by the city, the Finance Director shall report such
unpaid expenses to the City Council. Upon receipt of such report, the City
Council shall set a date and time for the hearing on the report, and notice
shall be mailed to each person whom the real property is assessed in the last
equalized assessment roll available on the date of mailing the notice. The
address of the owner shown on the assessment roll shall be conclusively deemed
to be the proper address for the purpose of mailing such notice of hearing.
      (1)   At the time fixed for the hearing on the report of expense, the
City Council shall hear it with any objections of the property owner liable to
be assessed for such work. The City Council may modify the report if it is
deemed necessary. The City Council shall then confirm the report by resolution.
      (2)   The resolution confirming the report shall direct the County
Auditor to add the amount of unpaid expenses as shown on the report, and as
confirmed by the resolution, to the next regular municipal tax bills assessed
against the parcels shown in the report.
(`67 Code, § 4-7-6)
   (B)   The cost of performing the abatement work authorized by this chapter
shall constitute a special assessment against the parcel of land. After the
assessment is made and confirmed, it is a lien on the parcel.
(`67 Code, § 4-7-7)
   (C)   The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the
manner of ordinary municipal taxes. If delinquent, the amount is subject to the
same penalties and procedures of foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary
municipal taxes.
(`67 Code, § 4-7-8)
§ 97.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Director of Public Works or his authorized agent may enter upon private
property to perform any abatement work authorized by this subchapter.
(`67 Code, § 4-7-9)
§ 97.08 PROCEDURE NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The procedure provided in this subchapter shall be cumulative and in
addition to any other procedure or procedures provided in ordinances of this
city or by state law for the abatement of any of the conditions described in §
97.03, and abatement under this subchapter shall not prejudice or affect any
other action, civil or criminal, for the maintenance of any such condition.
(`67 Code, § 4-7-13) (Ord. 87-16, passed 9-14-87)
SANITARY REGULATIONS
§ 97.20 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all territory within the
corporate limits of the city, hereinafter called the city.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-1)
§ 97.21 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to enforce all of the
provisions of this code and it shall be unlawful for any one to interfere with
the Health Officer in the performance of his duty.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-2)
   (B)   The term HEALTH OFFICER shall be construed to include any of his
assistants, deputies, inspectors or any other official representatives or
members of the Health Officer's staff.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-3)
§ 97.22 NUISANCE DEFINED.
   NUISANCE. Embraces public nuisance as known at common law or in equity,
jurisprudence, and whatever is dangerous to human life or detrimental to
health, and shall also embrace the over-crowding with occupants in any room
with insufficient ventilation or illumination, or inadequate or insanitary
sewage, or plumbing facilities, or uncleanliness, and whatever renders air,
food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-4)
§ 97.23 HAULING OF OBJECTIONABLE SUBSTANCES.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
person to permit any vehicle hauling or carrying or used for hauling or
carrying any dead animal, offal, market refuse, garbage, swill, night soil,
butchers' scraps, hog manure, or other nauseous or offensive substance to stand
or remain in or upon any public street or other public place longer than is
necessary for loading and hauling such substance to its destination or to
permit any such vehicle to be in a filthy or offensive condition.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-9)
§ 97.24 TIGHTLY COVERED RECEPTACLES.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
person to use any vehicle, tub or other receptacle for hauling any offal, hog
manure, or the contents of a privy, cesspool or sink or any nauseous or
offensive substance, unless such vehicle, tub or other receptacle shall be
sufficiently strong and tight to prevent any of the contents from leaking or
spilling therefrom and unless the same shall be so tightly covered as to not
attract flies, and as to prevent any nauseous odors from escaping therefrom.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-10)
§ 97.25 HOG MANURE.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful to use hog
manure as a fertilizer, unless the hog manure is turned into the soil within 24
hours after it is spread.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-11)
§ 97.26 MOSQUITO BREEDING.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful to maintain
any premises upon which there is stagnant or still water or a marshy condition
which harbors and breeds mosquitoes or other poisonous or objectionable
insects.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-12)
§ 97.27 VERMIN.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful to maintain
any building, vacant lot, premise, vehicle or place in such a manner as to
permit the breeding or harboring therein or thereon of flies, bedbugs,
cockroaches, black widow spiders, lice, fleas, or any other vermin.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-13)
§ 97.28 GAS, FUMES, DUST, SMOKE AND ODORS.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to
establish, conduct, maintain or operate or cause or permit to be established,
maintained, conducted or operated any business, factory, yard, establishment,
privy, or other place which will generate into or pollute the atmosphere with
any unwholesome, offensive or deleterious gas, fumes, dust, smoke, or odors, or
to allow offensive odors to be emitted from offal, garbage, or any animal or
vegetable matter.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-14)
§ 97.29 VACANT BUILDINGS.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any
person or agent to allow any vacant or unoccupied building to remain open and
of easy access to trespassers or to allow the same to become a habitation of
vagrants or to become infested with vermin of rodents, or to become a menace to
health.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-15)
Cross-reference:
   Vacant buildings, see §§
150.70 through
150.84
§ 97.30 DEAD ANIMALS.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful to fail to
cause any dead animal or part thereof, within six hours after the death of
same, to be buried so that there is at least three feet of soil above said
carcass, or to be disposed of in some other sanitary manner, provided, however,
that this section shall not apply to animals slaughtered for and fit for human
food.
(`67 Code, § 4-1-16)
CHAPTER 98: NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Section
   
98.01   Applicability
   
98.02   Definitions
   
98.03   Nuisances
   
98.04   Responsibility for property maintenance
   
98.05   Authority
   
98.06   Right of entry
   
98.07   Violations and penalties
   
98.08   Administrative citations
   
98.09   Additional enforcement
   
98.10   Cumulative remedies
   
98.11   Permits required
   
98.12   Summary abatement
   
98.13   Administrative abatement commencement proceeding
   
98.14   Notice of violation
   
98.15   Stop work order
   
98.16   Service of notice of violation
   
98.17   Notice and order
   
98.18   Appeal hearing; notice and order
   
98.19   General nuisance abatement
   
98.20   Failure to obey order; abatement by city
   
98.21   Interference of work prohibited
   
98.22   Costs of abatement
   
98.23   Procedure for assessing cost
   
98.24   Assessment of costs; special assessment property lien
§ 98.01 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property throughout
the city wherein any of the conditions, hereinafter specified, are found to
exist; provided, however, that any condition which would constitute a violation
of this chapter, but which is duly authorized under any other city, state or
federal law, shall not be deemed to violate this chapter.
   (B)   This chapter provides for remedies to abate nuisances, which are in
addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil which may be pursued by
the city to address any violation of this code.
   (C)   Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
specified meanings:
   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION. An official notification, on an appropriate form as
established by this chapter, of violation of any provision of the City of
Riverbank Code of Ordinances or Resolutions. Said citations require correction
of the violation and impose fines upon the responsible party. An administrative
citation is a "ticket" issued when voluntary compliance is not obtained within
a reasonable time. Administrative citations are not part of the judicial
process unlike infractions or misdemeanors citations.
   ANTIQUE AUTOMOBILE. An automobile that is at least 25 years of age or older
and is functioning and restored to comply with the manufacturer's original
specifications.
   CLASSIC AUTOMOBILE. A fine or unusual automobile that is distinguished and
recognized for their respective fine design, high engineering standards and
superior workmanship. Generally, a classic was high-priced when new and was
built in limited quantities. Other factors, including engine displacement,
custom coachwork and luxury accessories, such as power brakes, power clutch,
and "one-shot" or automatic lubrication systems, help determine whether a car
is considered to be a classic.
   CITY. The City of Riverbank, a municipal corporation of the State of
California.
   CODE COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR. The city's building official and the
authorized representative(s) of the city's building official.
   DEPARTMENT HEAD. The department head of the Community Development
Department, the Fire Chief, the Police Chief, the City Manager, and the City
Attorney, and their authorized representative(s).
   HIGHWAY. Any road, street, alley, way or place of whatever nature, publicly
maintained and opened to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular
travel. HIGHWAY includes city streets.
   IMPROVED DRIVEWAY. A private roadway providing access for motor vehicles to
a carport, garage, dwelling, or other structure with an improved surface
consisting of gravel, crushed rock, limerick, bituminous surface, concrete
surface, or other similar material.
   INOPERATIVE VEHICLE. Any vehicle which cannot be legally operated on the
street because of lack of current registration, lack of an engine,
transmission, wheels, tires, windshield or any other part or equipment
necessary to operate on public streets and/or highways.
   JUNK. Any cast-off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvage, scrapped,
unusable, worn-out or wrecked object, thing or material, including but not
limited to those composed in whole or in part of asphalt, brick, carbon,
cement, plastic or other synthetic substance, fiber, glass, plaster, plaster of
paris, rubber, terra cotta, wool, cotton, cloth, canvas, wood, metal, sand,
organic matter or other substance.
   JUNKYARD. Any premises on which any junk is abandoned, bailed, bartered,
bought, brought, bundled, deposited, disassembled, disposed of, exchanged,
handled, kept, stored or transported, regardless of whether or not such
activity is done for profit. JUNKYARD also includes any premise used for the
storage or deposit, whether in connection with another business or not, which
has stored or deposited two or more unregistered motor vehicles that are no
longer intended or in condition for legal use on the public highways, or used
parts of motor vehicles or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage or other
waste of discarded or secondhand material which has been a part, or intended to
be a part, of any motor vehicle, the sum of which parts or material shall be
equal in bulk to two or more motor vehicles. JUNKYARD shall be synonymous with
salvage yard. Such items shall also include any premise for the storage or
deposit of motor vehicles purchased for the purpose of dismantling the vehicles
for parts or for the use of the metal for scrap and where it is intended to
burn materials that are parts of a motor vehicle or cut up the parts thereof.
   NOTICE AND ORDER. Legal notice which detail structural or technical code
violations such as illegal construction, conversions, alterations, illegal
plumbing, mechanical or electrical installations, dangerous buildings, sub-
standard housing or similar.
   OWNER. Owner of record of real property, occupant, lessee, or interested
holder in same, as the case may be including the owner of real property whereon
a vehicle(s) or part(s) thereof is located.
   PREMISES. Any real property with all buildings, structures and improvements
thereon.
   PERSON. Any individual, group of individuals, firm, entity or corporation
owning, occupying or using any premises.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. Any person who exercises legal and/or physical control
over a premise within the city and/or has the ability to correct the violation
(s).
   SERVICE STATION. Any premises upon which the improvements are designed and
built for the primary purpose of selling to or providing others with fuels for
internal combustion engines (including alternative fuels such as natural gas or
hydrogen), lubricants, tires, batteries, other small accessories, parts or
motor vehicles, whether or not providing related automotive maintenance and
repair service.
   SPECIAL ASSESSMENT LIEN. A special assessment lien is a lien placed on real
property and is collected by the County Tax Assessor.
   VEHICLE. Any device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved,
or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.03 NUISANCES.
   (A)   Activities prohibited by Cal. Penal Code, Part 1, Title 10, §§ 370 and
371 and Cal. Penal Code §§ 11225 et seq., as enacted or hereinafter amended,
shall be unlawful, constitute a public nuisance, and enforcement and abatement
shall be undertaken as provided by law.
   (B)   It is hereby declared unlawful and a public nuisance per se for any
person owning, leasing, occupying and/or having charge or possession of any
premises or land in this city to permit, allow, or maintain such premises or
land such that any one or more of the following conditions or activities exist:
      (1)   Any condition recognized in law or equity as constituting a public
nuisance;
      (2)   Any dangerous, unsightly, or blighted condition that is detrimental
to the health, safety or welfare of the public;
      (3)   Any condition that is in violation of any duly enacted ordinance of
the city Code of Ordinances, or resolutions or lawful order promulgated by
authorized city officials;
      (4)   Any condition in violation of
Chapter 153 of this Code of Ordinances, including any condition in violation of
any written design finding, including design standard, design guideline, or
development standard that may be adopted by resolution or ordinance from time
to time by the City Council or the Planning Commission, or any condition
imposed on any entitlement, permit, contract, or environmental document issued
or approved by the city;
      (5)   Anything defined as a nuisance pursuant to state and federal law
including but not limited to Cal. Civil Code §§ 3479 et seq.;
      (6)   Any condition in violation of the weed and rubbish abatement laws
defined at Cal. Gov't Code §§ 39501 et seq. and §§ 39560 et seq. as enacted or
hereafter amended and enforced by city ordinance and resolutions;
      (7)   Any vacant, unoccupied or abandoned building or structure that is
not reasonably secured against uninvited entry or that constitutes a fire
hazard, or is in a state of unsightly or dangerous condition so as to
constitute a blighted condition detrimental to property values in the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
public;
      (8)   Any condition that constitutes an attractive nuisance; those
objects or conditions that, by their nature, may attract children or other
curious individuals including, but not limited to, unprotected hazardous or
unfilled pools, ponds, including pools or ponds that have not been properly
barricaded, ice boxes, refrigerators or excavations;
      (9)   Any condition that constitutes a visual blight. For purposes of
this code, visual blight is any unreasonable, non-permitted or unlawful
condition or use of real property, premises or of building exteriors which by
reason of its appearance as viewed from the public right-of-way, is detrimental
to the property of others or to the value of property of others, offensive to
the senses, or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood. Visual
blight includes, but is not limited to, the keeping, storing, depositing,
scattering over or accumulation on the premises any of the following:
         (a)   Lumber, junk, trash, debris, scrap metal, rubbish, packing
materials, building materials.
         (b)   Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as
furniture, stoves, appliances, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers,
automotive parts and equipment.
         (c)   Abandoned, wrecked, disabled, dismantled or inoperative vehicles
or parts thereof not screened from general view of the public right-of-way or
neighboring properties, except inoperative vehicles that are not abandoned and
are in an active state of renovation or restoration. For purposes of this
chapter, "active state of renovation or restoration" means that the vehicle is
actively being restored or renovated in a manner intended to make the vehicle
operational, and shall not include restoration or renovation that solely
improves the interior or exterior appearance of the vehicle. A vehicle shall
only be permitted to be in an active state of renovation or restoration for a
period that shall not exceed 90 days, whether consecutive or non-consecutive,
out of any 12-month period. Antique and classic automobiles under an active
state of renovation or restoration may exceed this time limit by a written
letter to the Community Development Department indicating the extent of
renovation and restoration and a time line for completion of such. Under no
circumstances may any automobile under active state of renovation or
restoration interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of neighboring properties,
including unreasonable noise, air emissions, illegal water discharges to the
storm water system or other environmental factors.
         (d)   Stagnant water or excavations.
         (e)   Any personal property, object, device, decoration, design,
fence, structure, landscaping or vegetation which is unsightly by reason of its
condition or its inappropriate location.
         (f)   Vehicles parked on any surface other than an improved driveway.
      (10)   The keeping, storage, depositing or accumulation of dirt, sand,
gravel, concrete or other similar materials which constitutes visual blight or
reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or is offensive to the
senses or is detrimental to nearby property or property values; provided,
however, that such of the listed materials as are being used or to be used for
a project of repair or renovation may be stored for such period of time as is
reasonably necessary to expeditiously complete the project and in no case shall
said storage of material exceed 30 days.
      (11)   The use of vehicles, motor homes, boats, trailers, campers or
camper shells, similar vehicles or equipment used for sleeping or cooking
purposes in areas and/or at times where and when such use is not specifically
authorized under its particular zoning district designation or as otherwise
delineated within the Municipal Code.
      (12)   Any condition of a building or structure deemed to be unsafe or
that in the discretion of the Building Official or the department head, would
constitute a threat to public safety, health, or welfare, or poses a security
problem by reason of dilapidation, fire hazard, disaster, damage or other
similar occurrence specified in this code or any other applicable law.
      (13)   Any condition of a building or portion thereof which constitutes a
substandard building, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 17920.3 or
its successor.
      (14)   Filling of an above ground or in-ground swimming pool with water
prior to the final electrical safety inspection required by the California Code
of Regulations, conducted by city inspectors and before such final inspection
has been noted on the permit card obtained from the city.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Every owner of real property within the city is required to maintain
such property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this chapter
and such owner remains liable for violations thereof regardless of any contract
or agreement with any third party regarding such property.
   (B)   Every occupant, lessee, tenant or holder of any interest in property,
other than as owner thereof, is required to maintain such property in the same
manner as is required of the owner thereof, and the duty imposed on the owner
thereof shall in no instance relieve those persons referred to from the similar
duty.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.05 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Code Compliance Administrator and the department head are hereby
authorized and directed to use the provisions of this chapter for the purpose
of enforcing this chapter and for abating or causing abatement of those
nuisances which exist as the result of violation of those ordinances and laws
for which their departments have primary enforcement responsibility.
   (B)   Pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 25, § 52, the procedures
contained in this chapter are deemed to be equivalent for the purposes intended
by, and may be used in lieu of the regulations and procedures for abatement
contained in Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1,
Subchapter 1, Art. 6.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the authority of
the Police Chief to enforce all laws within the Police Chief's jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection of any premises to
enforce the provisions of the Riverbank Code of Ordinances, and to the extent
authorized by law, the Code Compliance Administrator or the department head may
enter on such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to
perform any duty imposed upon him or her by this code, subject to the
requirements of Amendment IV of the United States Constitution and any other
provisions of applicable law.
   (B)   Whenever practicable, the Code Compliance Administrator or the
department head shall contact the occupant of such premises prior to entry and
inform the occupant of the reasons for such entry onto such property, and if
the occupant is other than the owner, the Code Compliance Administrator or the
department head shall also, if practicable, contact such owner.
   (C)   If entry onto any premises is denied by the owner or occupant of such
premises, or by any third party, the department head shall have recourse to
every remedy provided by law to secure peaceable entry on such premises to
perform the duties required by this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.07 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or other
entity to violate any provision of this chapter. Any person, firm, corporation,
or other entity, whether as owner, lessee, sub lesser, sub lessee, or occupant
of any premises that violates the provisions of this chapter or any order
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to any or all of the
following:
      (1)   The city shall under normal circumstances (unless there is an
eminent threat to the public health, safety and welfare) give written notice
and at least ten working days notice to the property owner to contact
appropriate city personnel so that an abatement plan can be approved by the
Community Development Director or designee prior to any further abatement
actions;
      (2)   If such person fails to contact the city within ten days or fails
to abate the property in accordance with the abatement plan, such person shall
be subject to summary or administrative abatement of the nuisance by the city,
and be subject to fines, civil penalties, fees and costs, including reasonable
attorney fees imposed by the city pursuant to the summary or administrative
abatement procedures contained in this chapter or any other provisions of law;
      (3)   Such person shall be guilty of an infraction for each day such
violation continues, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $1,000, or by imprisonment of not longer than six months, or both
for each violation;
      (4)   Such person shall be prosecuted in a civil action, criminal action,
or both brought by the city. The City Attorney or other authorized legal
representative may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enjoin or prosecute any nuisance violation of this chapter, or violation of any
other ordinance of the city;
      (5)   Each and every day that any such violation continues to exist shall
constitute a continuing and separate offense.
   (B)   Correction of any violation within ten days of the date of service of
the citation, as verified by the signature of an enforcement officer on the
citation, will result in the reduction of fines and fees by two-thirds for a
first time violator.
   (C)   Pursuant to Cal. Civil Code § 2929.3, a legal owner shall maintain
residential property purchased by that owner at a foreclosure sale, or acquired
by that owner through foreclosure under a mortgage or deed of trust, the city
may impose a fine of up to $1,000 per day for any violation. If the city
chooses to impose a fine pursuant to Cal. Civil Code § 2929.3, the Neighborhood
Improvement Officer shall give notice of the alleged violation, including a
description of the conditions that gave rise to the allegation, and notice of
the city's intent to assess a civil fine if action to correct the violation is
not commenced within a period of not less than 14 days and completed within a
period of not less than 30 days. The notice shall be mailed to the address
provided in the deed or other instrument as specified in Cal. Gov't Code §
27321.5(a), or, if none, to the return address provided on the deed or other
instrument. In accordance with § 98.18, the property owner may request an
appeal hearing for any fine imposed.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.08 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS.
   An administrative citation may be issued for any violation of this chapter
pursuant to §
10.99 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.09 ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city from
commencement of any available administrative, civil and/or criminal processing
to abate a nuisance pursuant to all applicable provisions of law as an
alternative and/or in addition to any enforcement proceedings set forth in this
chapter.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.10 CUMULATIVE REMEDIES.
   The remedies set forth in this chapter include summary and administrative
abatement, administrative citations, civil actions, criminal actions and all
other remedies provided for by law. All remedies set forth in this chapter and
in all city ordinances for the abatement or punishment of any violation
thereof, are cumulative and may be pursued alternatively or in combination.
Provisions of this code are to be supplementary and complimentary to all of the
city ordinances, the city Code, state law, and any law cognizable at common law
or in equity, and nothing herein shall be read, interpreted or construed in any
manner so as to limit any existing right or power of the city to abate any and
all nuisances and to enforce its ordinances.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.11 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   When a permit is required to correct a code violation pursuant to a
code compliance action, the property owner shall complete the permit, including
all inspections, corrections, and work in accordance with a timeline
established by the Code Compliance Administrator. In establishing the timeline
the Code Compliance Administrator shall provide a time frame that in his or her
judgment, is reasonable to expeditiously complete the permit. Failure to
strictly adhere to the established timeframe shall be deemed a continuing
violation subject to the remedies established in this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve the violator
from payment of any and all costs incurred by the city in enforcing and/or
causing the abatement of any violation of the this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.12 SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
   (A)   The city may immediately abate any nuisance or violation of this
chapter that poses a clear and imminent danger to, or requires immediate action
to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment of, life, health, property, or
essential public services. The city may perform this abatement without
providing prior notice or hearing to the owner or occupier of the offending
premises. Such summary abatement may proceed only upon the authorization of the
Manager and the City Attorney, or their respective designees. The abatement
shall include all actions necessary to secure the premises to prevent further
occurrences of the nuisance.
   (B)   The owner and/or occupier of the premises or the persons creating,
causing, committing, or maintaining the nuisance shall be subject to any
administrative fines, penalties, fees and costs, including reasonable attorney
fees, imposed or incurred by the city pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   Any abatement performed by the city pursuant to this section shall be
at the expense of the owner and/or occupier of the premises or the persons
creating, causing, allowing, permitting, committing, or maintaining the
nuisance. The city shall recover its expenses pursuant to the special
assessment lien procedures contained in this code or any other applicable
provision of law.
   (D)   As soon as practicable following completion of the abatement, the Code
Compliance Administrator or the department head shall issue a notice of
violation and/or notice and order in accordance with this chapter. Persons
receiving such notice shall be entitled to all hearing rights as provided
herein.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.13 ADMINISTRATIVE ABATEMENT COMMENCEMENT PROCEEDING.
   (A)   Whenever the Code Compliance Administrator or the department head has
inspected or caused to be inspected any premises or condition and has found and
determined that such premises or condition are in violation of this chapter,
and that such violation does not pose an immediate danger to health or safety,
the Code Compliance Administrator or the department head may commence
proceedings to cause abatement of the nuisance as provided herein. When the
Code Compliance Administrator or department head has found that a violation of
this chapter poses an immediate danger to health or safety, the Code Compliance
Administrator or department head may pursue any remedies available under this
chapter or by law, including, but not limited to, summary abatement or
administrative citation.
   (B)   Once proceedings have been commenced pursuant to this chapter to
declare a public nuisance, no premises or building shall be deemed to be in
compliance with this chapter solely because such building or premises
thereafter becomes occupied or unoccupied.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.14 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Upon determination by the Code Compliance Administrator or the department
head that a premise is in violation of this chapter, and a notice of violation,
administrative citation and/or a notice and order has not been issued against
the same premises, or the same property owner but at a different premise,
address or location, within the city, within the last 12 months, and that the
violation does not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the Code
Compliance Administrator or the department head may issue a notice of violation
to the owner of record of the premises and to the occupant of the premises, if
any. The notice of violation shall contain:
   (A)   The name and address of the person, firm, or corporation in violation,
and the street address of the property where the violation is present;
   (B)   A statement specifying the condition(s) which constitute a nuisance;
   (C)   A statement explaining which specific code section has been violated;
   (D)   The range of the administrative, civil and/or criminal actions and
monetary penalties, as described herein, that the city may impose for such
violations if not corrected;
   (E)   An order to correct the violation within a date certain, said date
which shall be specified on the notice of violation and determined by the
specific violation; and
   (F)   A statement informing the recipient of the name and office telephone
number of the person to contact should the recipient desire to explain why he
or she believes the premises should not be declared to be a public nuisance and
abated; penalties should not be assessed; and the costs of such abatement
should not become a charge and lien against the premises. The department head
may rescind or modify the notice of violation based on substantive evidence
presented by the recipient.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.15 STOP WORK ORDER.
   If the violation is related to a permit, license or other approval of a
project, the notice of violation may be accompanied by a stop work order which
orders the recipient to stop immediately any and all work on the project that
is subject to the permit, license or approval until the violation is corrected.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.16 SERVICE OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   A copy of the notice of violation, and any amended or supplemental notices,
shall be served either by personal delivery or by First Class U.S. mail,
postage prepaid, upon the record owner at the address as it appears on the
latest equalized assessment roll of Stanislaus County, and upon the occupant of
the premises, if any. If neither of these methods result in the notice being
served upon the record owner and any occupants after reasonable attempts to
serve, a copy of the notice shall be posted on the premises.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.17 NOTICE AND ORDER.
   Notice and orders are primarily used for structural or technical code
violations such as illegal construction, conversions, alterations, illegal
plumbing, mechanical or electrical installations, dangerous buildings, sub-
standard housing or similar. When issued, the violation must be remedied in 30
calendar days, unless there is an immediate danger risk. If there is an eminent
threat of danger the violation must be remedied immediately.
   (A)   Grounds for issuance. A notice and order may be issued under any of
the following circumstances:
      (1)   When a notice of violation has been served, and the specified time
has passed without adequate correction and abatement of the violation;
      (2)   When a stop work order has been issued but has not been complied
with;
      (3)   When the city has performed a summary abatement pursuant to this
chapter;
      (4)   When the same type or character of violation has been committed by
the same person, or on the same premises, or a notice of violation, an
administrative citation, or a notice and order has been served on the same
person, or on the same premises, within the past 12 months.
   (B)   Contents of notice and order. A notice and order shall contain the
following:
      (1)   The name and address of the person, corporation, or entity in
violation, and the street address of the property where the violation is
present;
      (2)   A statement specifying the condition(s) which constitute a
violation and nuisance;
      (3)   A statement explaining which specific code section(s) have been
violated;
      (4)   A statement informing the recipient of the number of days from the
date of the notice and order the recipient has to voluntarily abate the
violation and nuisance;
      (5)   A statement informing the recipient of his or her right to appeal
the determination to Planning Commission by filing with the Community
Development Department within ten calendar days from the date of the notice and
order, and on a form available from the Community Development Department, a
written statement requesting a hearing and providing a factual and specific
explanation of: why the premises should not be declared to be a public nuisance
and abated; and why the costs of such abatement should not become a special
assessment lien against the premises;
      (6)   A statement that if the person, corporation or entity fails to
abate the violation and nuisance or fails to file on a timely basis a request
for an appeal hearing, the notice and order shall be final and not subject to
judicial review, and all persons served with such notice shall be deemed to
have consented to the abatement of the nuisance and that, at the election of
the city, the city will abate the nuisance and the costs of such abatement may
be charged against the premises and may be recorded as a special assessment
lien against the premises; and
   (C)   Service of notice and order.
      (1)   Persons entitled to service. The notice and order shall be served
upon the owner of the premises, any occupants of the premises, and any other
person, corporation, or entity in violation. If the city proposes to impose a
special assessment lien on the property, the city official issuing the notice
and order shall also serve one copy on each of the following if known or
disclosed from official public records: the holder of any mortgage, deed of
trust, or other encumbrance of record; and the owner or holder of any lease of
record. The failure of the city official issuing the order to serve any person
required to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings under this chapter
or relieve any person who was duly served from any duty or obligation imposed
on him by the provisions of this section.
      (2)   Method of service. Unless otherwise provided in this section,
service of a notice and order shall be made by personal service or by First
Class U.S. mail, postage prepaid with confirmation of delivery by the U.S.
Postal Service. Service on any property owner in violation is deemed complete
when it is served or delivered at the address listed by the property owner on
the latest equalized assessment roll of Stanislaus County, or as known to the
city official issuing the order. If personal service or service by mail with
confirmation of delivery is not reasonably feasible, service of the notice and
order may be made by posting the notice on the subject premises and sending a
copy by regular United States mail service. Service posting in the manner
herein provided shall be effective on the date of posting. As an alternative,
substituted service of the notice and order may be made as follows:
         (a)   1.   By leaving a copy during usual business hours at the
recipient's business with the person who is apparently in charge, and then
mailing a copy by first class mail to the recipient at the address where the
copy was left; or
            2.   By leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual place
of abode, in the presence of a competent member of the household, and then
mailing a copy by first class mail to the recipient at the address where the
copy was left.
         (b)   If the party entitled to service has a property manager or
rental agency overseeing the premises, substituted service may be made as set
forth above upon the property manager or rental agency.
         (c)   Substituted service may be made by posting the notice and order
on the premises and mailing a copy of the notice and order to the person,
corporation, or entity in violation at the address of the property on which the
violation has occurred or is occurring.
         (d)   If the person, corporation, or entity in violation or other
person entitled to service cannot be located or service cannot be made as set
forth in this section, service may be made by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Riverbank. Service shall be deemed
sufficient when it is accomplished pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 6063.
   (D)   Preparation of a record of the proceeding shall be governed by
California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6, as presently written or
hereinafter amended.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.18 APPEAL HEARING; NOTICE AND ORDER.
   (A)   Payment of appeal fee.
      (1)   Any person, corporation, or entity seeking to appeal a notice and
order shall be required to pay to the city, at the time the appeal is
requested, a nonrefundable appeal fee to be set by resolution of the City
Council. The appeal fee is intended to cover the costs, expenses, and city
employees' time incurred by the city in processing, preparing for, and hearing
of the appeal. No appeal request is valid unless accompanied by the appeal fee
or a city hardship waiver is granted.
      (2)   Hardship waiver. If the appealing party establishes to the
satisfaction of the Director of Finance or designee, by means of tax returns,
pay stubs or other similar documentary evidence, and submits a declaration
under penalty of perjury that paying the appeal fee would cause undue financial
hardship to the appealing party, the Director of Finance may grant a waiver of
the appeal fee. The Director of Finance's determination is not appealable and
shall be final as to the hardship waiver request.
   (B)   Hearing body. The appeal shall be heard by an Appeals Board. The
Planning Commission, in accordance with §
32.35(F) of this Code of Ordinances, shall act as the Appeals Board. Members of
the Appeals Board shall not have had any responsibility for the investigation,
prosecution or enforcement of nuisances under this chapter and shall not have
had any personal involvement in the appeal to be heard within the past 12
months.
   (C)   Setting appeal hearing. The Appeal Board hearing shall be set in
accordance with the regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting, but shall
be opened as a separate and distinct body. The notice of the appeal hearing
shall be sent to the appellant by first class mail at the address provided with
the written appeal request. The appeal hearing shall be set for a date no
sooner than 20 days following a request for an appeal hearing. Notice of the
appeal hearing shall be mailed at least 15 days before the date set for
hearing.
   (D)   Conduct of appeal hearing.
      (1)   Testimony at the hearing. At the time set for the appeal hearing,
the Appeals Board shall proceed to hear testimony from the representative of
the city, the appellant, and any other competent persons with respect to the
determination of a violation and nuisance or the imposition of an
administrative penalty.
      (2)   Record of oral evidence at hearing. The proceedings at the hearing
shall be reported by a tape recording. Either party may provide a certified
shorthand reporter to maintain a record of the proceedings at the requesting
party's own expense.
      (3)   Continuances. The Chairperson of the Appeals Board may, upon
request of the person, corporation, or entity against whom a penalty is to be
imposed, or upon request of the city, grant continuances from time to time for
extreme or unusual cause shown, or upon the Appeals Board's own motion.
      (4)   Oaths; certification. The Chairperson of the Appeals Board or
certified shorthand reporter shall administer the oath or affirmation.
      (5)   Evidence rules. Cal. Gov't Code § 11513(a), (b), and (c) shall
apply to all administrative hearings. At the Appeals Board Chairperson's sole
discretion, other relevant evidence may be admissible and hearsay evidence may
be used for the purpose of supplementing and explaining other evidence.
      (6)   Burden of proof. The accuracy of the notice and order containing
the description of the violations and/or public nuisance and the actions
required to abate such nuisance or violation is deemed a rebuttable presumption
and the burden is on the appellant to provide such facts and information to
overcome such presumption by a preponderance of the evidence.
      (7)   Rights of parties.
         (a)   Each party shall have the following rights among others: To call
and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; to
introduce documentary and physical evidence; to cross-examine opposing
witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; to impeach any
witness regardless of which party first called that witness to testify; to
rebut the evidence against him or her; to represent himself or herself or to be
represented by anyone of his or her choice.
         (b)   If a party does not proficiently speak or understand the English
language, that party may provide an interpreter, at that party's own cost, to
translate for the party. An interpreter shall not have been a resident of the
premises or have had any personal relationship with or involvement in the
parties or issues of the case prior to the hearing.
      (8)   Official notice. In reaching a decision, the Appeals Board may take
official notice, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of
any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or which
may appear in any of the official records of the city or county or any of their
departments.
      (9)   Inspection of the premises.
         (a)   An Appeals Board member may inspect the premises involved in the
hearing prior to, during, or after the hearing, provided that: Notice of such
inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made; the
parties consent and are given an opportunity to be present during the
inspection; and the Appeals Board member shall state for the record during the
hearing, or file a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the
hearing record, upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed
and the conclusions drawn there from.
         (b)   Each party shall then have a right to rebut or explain the
matters so stated by the Appeals Board member either for the record during the
hearing or by filing a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the
hearing record.
         (c)   Notice to the parties or the owners' consent to inspect the
building and surrounding properties is not required if the property can be
inspected from areas in which the general public has access or with permission
of the other persons authorized to provide access to the property on which the
building is located.
   (E)   Form and contents of the decision; finality of decision.
      (1)   Format of Appeals Board decision. The Appeals Board shall issue a
written decision containing findings of fact and a determination of the issues
presented. The Appeals Board may affirm or reverse the notice of violation or
the notice and order imposed by the city. The Appeals Board may not reduce,
waive or conditionally reduce the fines established by the city.
      (2)   Contents of Appeals Board's decision. If it is shown by a
preponderance of all the evidence that the condition of the premises
constitutes a violation of the Riverbank Code of Ordinances or is a public
nuisance as defined in this chapter, the decision shall declare the premises to
be a public nuisance and shall order and require the appellant to abate the
nuisance not later than ten calendar days after the issuance of the decision
or, if ten calendar days is insufficient to abate the nuisance, within such
other time as specified by the Appeals Board not to exceed 60 days. The
decision shall inform the appellant that if the nuisance is not abated within
the time specified, the nuisance may be abated by the city in such manner as
may be ordered by the department head and the expense thereof made a special
assessment lien upon the property involved. This is in addition to any other
legal remedies that the city may choose to compel compliance.
      (3)   Service of the Appeals Board's decision. Upon issuance of the
decision, the city shall serve a copy on the appellant by first class mail to
the address provided by appellant in the written notice of appeal. The Appeals
Board's decision shall be deemed served three days after the date it is mailed
to the address provided by the appellant.
      (4)   Finality of appeal's decision. The decision of the Appeals Board on
an appeal of a notice and order may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to
§
153.218(B) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.19 GENERAL NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   After any notice of violation or any decision of the Appeals Board made
pursuant to this chapter has become final, no person to whom any such order is
directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.20 FAILURE TO OBEY ORDER; ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   (A)   If, after any notice of violation or any order of Appeals Board made
pursuant to this chapter has become final, the person to whom such order is
directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the department head
is authorized and directed to cause the nuisance to be abated by city personnel
or private contract. In furtherance of this section, the department head shall
obtain a warrant, if required, and thereafter is expressly authorized to enter
upon the premises for the purpose of abating the nuisance.
   (B)   Additionally, any person who fails to obey such order shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable as specified in §
10.99(B) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.21 INTERFERENCE OF WORK PROHIBITED.
   No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee,
contractor or authorized representative of the city, or with any person who
owns or holds any estate or interest in any premises on which a nuisance exists
and which must be abated under the provisions of this chapter, whenever such
officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, or
person having an interest or estate in such premises is engaged in the work of
abating any nuisance as required by the provisions of this chapter, or in
performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work
authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.22 COSTS OF ABATEMENT.
   (A)   The department head shall keep an account of the costs and expenses of
abating such nuisance, and shall render a statement of such costs to the person
or persons receiving the notice to abate.
   (B)   Such person or persons receiving the notice of violation, citation or
decision of the Appeals Board shall be liable to the city for any and all costs
and expenses to the city involved in abating the nuisance. Such costs and
expenses are due upon receipt of the statement required in division (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Costs and expenses as referred to in this section shall include all
costs allowed to be recovered by law, including attorneys' fees as allowed by
Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5 or its successor.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.23 PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSING COST.
   If the person liable to pay the costs of abatement fails to do so within 30
calendar days of receiving the statement of such costs, the city may initiate
proceedings to have such costs assessed against the real property or premises
on which the city abated the nuisance. Such proceedings and notice of such
proceedings shall be performed in accordance with Cal. Gov't Code § 54954.6.
The costs of abatement shall be treated as a new assessment for purposes of §
54954.6. No majority protest rights exist for this assessment. The Finance
Director shall present to the City Council a report of costs for abating the
nuisance at the public meeting required by § 54954.6.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
§ 98.24 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROPERTY LIEN.
   (A)   The total cost for abating a nuisance shall constitute a special
assessment against the premises to which it relates, and upon recordation in
the office of the County Recorder of a notice of lien, shall constitute a lien
on the property for the amount of such assessment. The procedure for collecting
abatement costs through a special assessment lien shall be in accordance with
Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5.
   (B)   After such recordation, a copy of the lien shall be turned over to the
County Tax Assessor, who shall then enter the amount of the lien on the
assessment rolls as a special assessment.
   (C)   Thereafter, said amount shall be collected at the same time and in the
same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to
the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of
delinquency as provided by Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5 and as provided for
ordinary municipal taxes.
(Ord. 2008-016, passed 1-12-09)
CHAPTER 99: ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES
Section
   
99.01   Applicability
   
99.02   Director defined
   
99.03   Compliance order
   
99.04   Method of service
   
99.05   Hearing
   
99.06   Notice of hearing
   
99.07   Hearing; findings and order
   
99.08   Administrative order
   
99.09   Administrative penalties
   
99.10   Administrative costs
   
99.11   Failure to comply with administrative compliance order
   
99.12   Right of judicial review
   
99.13   Recovery of administrative civil penalties
   
99.14   Report of compliance after administrative order
   
99.15   Compliance dispute
   
99.16   Lien procedure
   
99.17   Public hearing and protests
   
99.18   Recording of lien
   
99.19   Satisfaction of lien
§ 99.01 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter provides for administrative remedies, which are in
addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued
by the city to address any violation of this code.
   (B)   Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.02 DIRECTOR DEFINED.
   For purposes of this chapter, DIRECTOR means the Code Enforcement Officer as
appointed by the City Council, which is charged with responsibility for
enforcement of any provision of this code.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.03 COMPLIANCE ORDER.
   (A)   Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that a violation of
any provision of this code within Code Enforcement Officer's responsibility is
occurring or exists, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a written
compliance order to any person responsible for the violation, upon first
obtaining approval of the City Council.
   (B)   A compliance order issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The date and location of the violation;
      (2)   The section of this code violated and description of the violation;
      (3)   The actions required to correct the violation:
      (4)   The time period after which administrative penalties will begin to
accrue if compliance with the order has not been achieved;
      (5)   Either a copy of this chapter or an explanation of the consequences
of noncompliance with this chapter and a description of the hearing procedure
and appeal process.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.04 METHOD OF SERVICE.
   (A)   All notices required by this chapter shall be served as provided in
this section.
   (B)   Where real property is involved, written notice shall be mailed to the
property owner at the address as shown on the last equalized County assessment
roll.
   (C)   Where personal service or service by mail upon the property owner is
unsuccessful, a copy of the order shall be conspicuously posted at the property
which is the subject of the roll.
   (D)   The failure of any person to receive any notice required under this
chapter shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this
chapter.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.05 HEARING.
   (A)   If the Code Compliance Officer determines that all violations have
been corrected within the time specified in the compliance order, no further
action shall be taken.
   (B)   If full compliance is not achieved within the time specified in the
compliance order, the Code Compliance Officer shall advise the secretary to the
Appeals Board to set a hearing before the Board.
   (C)   The secretary to the Appeals Hearing Board shall cause a written
notice of hearing to be served on the violator and, where real property is
involved, a notice of hearing shall be served on the property owner at the
address as it appears on last equalized County assessment roll available on the
date the notice is prepared.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.06 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   (A)   Every notice of hearing on a compliance order shall contain the date,
time and place at which the hearing shall be conducted by the Appeals Hearing
Board.
   (B)   Each hearing shall set for a date not less than 15 working days nor
more than 60 working days from the date of the notice of hearing unless the
Director determines that the matter is urgent or that good cause exists for an
extension of time.
   (C)   This hearing serves to provide the full opportunity of a person
subject to a compliance order to object to the determination that a violation
has occurred and/or that the violation has continued to exist. The failure of
any person subject to a compliance order, pursuant to this chapter, to appear
at the hearing shall constitute a failure to exhausted administrative remedies.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.07 HEARINGS; FINDINGS AND ORDER.
   (A)   At the place and time set forth in the notice of hearing, the Appeals
Hearing Board shall conduct a hearing on the compliance order issued pursuant
to
§ 99.03.
   (B)   The Board shall consider any written or oral evidence consistent with
its rules and procedures regarding the violations and compliance by the
violator or by the real property owner.
   (C)   Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the
Board shall make findings and issue its determination regarding:
      (1)   The existence of the violation;
      (2)   The failure of the violator or owner to take required corrective
action within the required time period.
   (D)   The Board shall issue written findings on each violation. The findings
shall be supported by evidence received at the hearing.
   (E)   If the Board finds by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation
has occurred and that the violation was not corrected within the time period
specified in the compliance order, the Board shall issue an administrative
order.
   (F)   If the Board finds that no violation has occurred or that the
violation was corrected within the time period specified in the compliance
order, the Board shall issue a finding of those facts.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.08 ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER.
   If the Appeals Hearing Board determines that a violation occurred which was
not corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the
Board shall issue an administrative order described in
§ 99.07 which imposes any or all of the following;
   (A)   An order to correct, including a schedule for correction where
appropriate;
   (B)   Administrative penalties as provided in
§ 99.09;
   (C)   Administrative costs as provided in
§ 99.10.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.09 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   The Appeals Hearing Board may impose administrative penalties for the
violation of any provision of this code in an amount not to exceed a maximum of
$2,500 per day for each ongoing violation, except that the total administrative
penalty shall not exceed $100,000 exclusive of administrative costs, interest
and restitution for compliance re-inspection, for any related series of
violations.
   (B)   In determining the amount of the administrative penalty, the Board may
take any or all of the following factors into consideration:
      (1)   The duration of the violation;
      (2)   The frequency, recurrence and number of violations, related or
unrelated, by the same violator;
      (3)   The seriousness of the violation;
      (4)   The good faith efforts of the violator to come into compliance;
      (5)   The economic impact of the penalty on the violator;
      (6)   The impact of the violation on the community;
      (7)   Such other factors as justice may require.
   (C)   Administrative penalties imposed by the Board shall accrue from the
date specified in the compliance order and shall cease to accrue on the date
the violation is corrected as determined by the Director or the Board.
   (D)   The Board, in its discretion, may suspend the composition of
applicable penalties for any period of time during which:
      (1)   The violator has filed for necessary permits; and
      (2)   Such permits are required to achieve compliance; and
      (3)   Such permits applications are actively pending before the city,
state or other appropriate governmental agency.
   (E)   Administrative penalties assessed by the Board shall be due by the
date specified in the administrative order.
   (F)   Administrative penalties assessed by the Board are a debt owed to the
city and, in addition to all other means of enforcement, if the violation is
located on real property, may be enforced by means of lien against the real
property on which the violation occurred.
   (G)   If the violation is not corrected as specified in the Board's order to
correct, administrative penalties shall continue to accrue on daily basis until
the violation is corrected, subject to the maximum amount set forth in
§ 99.09 (A) above.
   (H)   If the violator gives written notice to the Director that the
violation has been corrected and if the Director finds that the compliance has
been achieved, the Director shall deem the date the written notice was
postmarked or personally delivered to the Director or the date of the final
inspection, whichever first occurred, to be the date the violation was
corrected. If no written notice is provided to the Director, the violation will
be deemed corrected on the date of the final inspection.
(Ord. 2001-1-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.10 ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
   (A)   The Appeals Hearing Board shall assess administrative costs against
the violator when it finds that a violation has occurred and the compliance has
not been achieved within the time specified in the compliance order.
   (B)   The administrative costs may include any and all costs incurred by the
city in connection with the matter before the Appeals Hearing Board including,
but not limited to, costs of investigation, staffing costs incurred in
preparation for the hearing and for the hearing itself, and costs for all re-
inspections necessary to enforce the compliance order.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.11 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ADMINISTRATIVE COMPLIANCE ORDER.
   Failure to pay the assessed administrative penalties and administrative
costs specified in the administrative order of the Appeals Hearing Board may be
enforced as:
   (A)   A personal obligation of the violator; and/or
   (B)   If the violation is in connection with real property, a lien upon the
real property. The lien shall remain in effect until all of the administrative
penalties, interest and administrative costs are paid in full.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.12 RIGHT OF JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved by an administrative order of the Appeals Hearing Board
may obtain review of the Administrative Order in the Superior Court by filing
with the court a petition for writ of mandate pursuant to Cal. Code Civ. Proc.
§ 1094.6. (NOTE: This procedure specifies calendar days not working days.)
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.13 RECOVERY OF ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES.
   The city may collect the assessed administrative penalties and
administrative costs by use of all available legal means, including recordation
of a lien pursuant to
§ 99.16.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.14 REPORT OF COMPLIANCE AFTER ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER.
   If the Director determines that compliance has been achieved after the
Appeals Hearing Board has sustained a compliance order, the Director shall file
a report indicating that compliance has been achieved.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.15 COMPLIANCE DISPUTE.
   (A)   If the Director does not file a report pursuant to
§ 99.14 above, a violator who believes the compliance has been achieved may
request a compliance hearing before the Appeals Hearing Board by filing a
request for a hearing with the secretary of the Board.
   (B)   The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same manner as
hearing on a compliance order provided in
§§ 99.06 through
99.17.
   (C)   The Board shall determine if compliance has been achieved and, if so,
when it was achieved.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.16 LIEN PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Whenever the amount of any administrative penalty and/or
administrative cost imposed by the Appeals Hearing Board pursuant to this
chapter in connection with real property has not been satisfied in full within
90 working days and/or has not been successfully challenged by a timely writ of
mandate, this obligation may constitute a lien against the real property on
which the violation occurred.
   (B)   The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded
with the County Recorder. Once recorded, the Administrative Order shall have
the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions
of Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 697.340 and may be extended as provided in Cal. Code
Civ. Proc. §§ 683.110 through 683.220.
   (C)   Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the judgment
remaining unsatisfied pursuant to law.
   (D)   Prior to recording any such lien, the Director of Finance shall
prepare and file with the City Clerk a report stating the amounts due and
owing.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall fix a time, date and place for hearing such
report and any protests or objections thereto by City Council.
   (F)   The Director of Finance shall cause written notice to be served on the
property owner not less than ten working days prior to the time set for the
hearing. Such notice shall be served as provided in
§ 99.04
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.17 PUBLIC HEARING AND PROTESTS.
   (A)   Any person whose real property is subject to a lien pursuant to
§ 99.16 may file a written protest with the City Clerk and/or may protest
orally at the City Council meeting.
   (B)   Each written protest or objection must contain a description of the
property in which the protesting party is interested and the grounds of such
protest or objection.
   (C)   The City Council, after the hearing, shall adopt a resolution
confirming, discharging or modifying the amount of the lien.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.18 RECORDING OF LIEN.
   Thirty days following the adoption of a resolution by the City Council
imposing a lien the City Clerk shall file the same as a judgment lien in the
Office of the County Recorder of Stanislaus County, California. The lien may
carry such additional administrative charges as set forth by resolution of the
City Council.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
§ 99.19 SATISFACTION OF LIEN.
   Once payment in full is received by the city for outstanding penalties and
cost, the Director of Finance shall either record a notice of satisfaction or
provide the property owner or financial institution a notice of satisfaction so
they may record this notice with the Office of the County Recorder. Such notice
of satisfaction shall cancel the city's lien.
(Ord. 2001-05, passed 7-9-01)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   BUSINESS LICENSE TAX
         
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
         
112.   BINGO GAMES
         
113.   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
         
114.   FORTUNE-TELLING
         
115.   PUBLIC DANCES
         
116.   TAXICABS
         
117.   SECONDHAND DEALERS
         
118.   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS REGULATIONS
         
119.   MASSAGE/BODYWORK ESTABLISHMENTS
         
120.   CANNABIS REGULATIONS
         
121.   MOBILEHOME RENT STABILIZATION
         
122.   VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISE
         
123.   TOBACCO AND E-CIGARETTE SALES LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
         
124.   SIMULATED GAMBLING DEVICES
         
125.   TATTOO AND BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
         
126.   SIDEWALK VENDING
         
127.   HEMP CULTIVATION
         
128.   MOBILE FOOD VENDING PROGRAM
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSE TAX
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Purpose
   
110.03   Effect on other ordinances
   
110.04   License and tax payment required
   
110.05   Separate license for each location
   
110.06   Evidence of doing business
   
110.07   Constitutional apportionment
   
110.08   Exceptions
   
110.09   Contents of license
   
110.10   Application; denial
   
110.11   Appeal
   
110.12   Additional power of Collector
   
110.13   License nontransferable; changed location and ownership
   
110.14   Duplicate license
   
110.15   Posting and keeping licenses
   
110.16   License payments; when due
   
110.17   Delinquent taxes
   
110.18   Business license tax fees
   
110.19   Delivery by vehicle
   
110.20   Outside business
   
110.21   Rules and regulations
   
110.22   License tax a debt
   
110.23   Remedies cumulative
   
110.24   Effect on past actions, unexpired licenses
   
110.25   Penalty for violation
   
110.26   Revocation of license
Cross-reference:
   Home occupations, see
§§ 153.265 through 153.267
   Sales and use tax, see
§§ 34.20 through 34.31
   Transient occupancy tax, see
§§ 34.45 through
34.58
Statutory reference:
   State exemptions from business licensing, including certain non-profit
organizations and certain     professions, see Cal. Gov't Code § 37101 and Cal.
Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 16000 et seq.
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Professions, trades, and occupations and all and every kind of
calling whether or not carried on for profit.
   COLLECTOR. The City Manager, or other city officer charged with the
administration of this chapter.
   PERSONS. All domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates,
joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts,
business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and
carrying on any business in the city, other than as an employee.
   SALE. The transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to
property for a consideration; the serving, supplying, or furnishing for a
consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of
property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the
payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definitions
shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect,
results in a sale within the contemplation of law.
   SWORN STATEMENT. An affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take
oaths, or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-1)
§ 110.02 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and
is not intended for regulation.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-2) (Ord. 74-19, passed 9-9-74)
§ 110.03 EFFECT ON OTHER ORDINANCES.
   Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any
business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any
license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other
ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of
other ordinances. No person shall be issued a business license until the
Collector is satisfied that the location of the business is in compliance with
the zoning chapter of the city code. Further, no license shall be issued to any
person for a business for which a health permit is required by law until such
permit has been obtained from the Health Officer of the city or the county, as
the case may be.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-3) (Ord. 83-4, passed 5-23-83)
§ 110.04 LICENSE AND TAX PAYMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence, establish, maintain
or carry on any business enterprise, whatever, in the city:
      (1)   Without first obtaining a license from the city, whether the
business enterprise or the person is subject to a city license tax under this
chapter or not, and;
      (2)   Without fully complying with any and all other regulations of such
business contained in this chapter, or other regulatory provisions now existing
or hereafter to be adopted by the city.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a
license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts
with applicable statutes of the United States or the state. Persons not so
required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city
nevertheless shall be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-4)
§ 110.05 SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH LOCATION.
   A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or
separate location of the business transacted or carried on, and each license
shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business
licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license,
provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and
incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall
not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments, and
provided further that any person conducting two or more types of business at
the same location, but businesses which use a single set or integrated set of
books and records may obtain one license for all businesses at that one
location.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-5)
§ 110.06 EVIDENCE OF DOING BUSINESS.
   When any person shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book, or
newspapers, advertise, hold out, or represent that he is in business in the
city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a
governmental agency indicating that he is in business in the city, and such
person fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the Collector that he is not
conducting a business in the city, after being requested to do so by the
Collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that he is
conducting a business in the city.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-6)
§ 110.07 CONSTITUTIONAL APPORTIONMENT.
   None of the license taxes provided for by this chapter shall be so applied
as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the
equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitutions of the United
States and the state.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-7) (Ord. 74-19, passed 9-9-74)
§ 110.08 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any
person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the
Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or the state from the
payment of such taxes as are herein prescribed.
   (B)   Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a
sworn statement with the Collector stating the facts upon which exemption is
claimed, and providing any additional documentation the Collector reasonably
deems necessary in the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such
person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by this chapter.
   (C)   The Collector shall, upon a proper showing contained in the sworn
statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under this section
without payment to the city of the license tax required by this chapter.
   (D)   The Collector, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for a
hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the
provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled
to the exemption as provided herein.
   (E)   Persons engaged in the rental of real property, provided that the
average total monthly gross receipts from all rentals does not exceed $1,000
and that the number of rental units does not exceed ten, shall also be exempt.
   (F)   Any public utility possessing a franchise granted by the city, and
making an annual payment under such franchise, shall not be subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
   (G)   The City Manager may exempt a nonprofit corporation, association, club
or society, from the payment of the business license tax fee upon providing
documentation of current nonprofit status. The nonprofit must be organized
primarily for charitable purposes, including but not limited to veteran
affairs, public welfare, and civic betterment.
   (H)   Independent contractors retained by the city for the express purpose
of providing recreational services and programs on behalf of the City Parks and
Recreation Department, shall also be exempt. This exemption is limited to
independent contractors who are class instructors, carnival operators, circus
operators, and other similar event operators that agree to provide a percentage
of the revenue generated from the activity to the Parks and Recreation
Department.
   (I)   The business license fees for special and seasonal activities, as
listed under §
110.18(B), shall be waived for all nonprofit organizations that provide
documentation of current nonprofit status. Vendors, whether for profit or not
for profit, operating at City Parks and Recreation Department organized or
sponsored events shall be exempt from paying the business license fees.
   (J)   Every soldier, sailor or marine of the United States who has received
an honorable discharge or a release from active duty under honorable conditions
from such service, and provides documentation to the Collector to that effect,
may hawk, peddle and vend any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him or her,
except spirituous, malt, vinous or other intoxicating liquor, without payment
of any license, tax or fee whatsoever, and the Collector shall issue to such
soldier, sailor or marine, without cost, a license therefor.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-8) (Ord. 81-16, passed 8-24-81; Am. Ord. 2012-001, passed 4-
23-12; Am. Ord. 2015-005, passed 3-10-15)
§ 110.09 CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
   Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter
shall make application as hereinafter prescribed for the same to the Collector
of the city, and upon the payment of the prescribed license tax the Collector
shall issue to such person a license which shall contain the following
information:
   (A)   The name of the person to whom the license is issued;
   (B)   The name and description or activity of the business licensed;
   (C)   The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on;
   (D)   The date of the expiration of such license; and
   (E)   Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-9) (Ord. 83-4, passed 5-23-83)
§ 110.10 APPLICATION; DENIAL.
   (A)   First license. Upon a person making application for the first license
to be issued hereunder or for a newly established business, such person shall
furnish to the Collector a sworn statement, upon a form provided by the
Collector; setting forth the following information:
      (1)   The exact nature or kind of business for which a license is
requested;
      (2)   The place where such business is to be carried on, and if the same
is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the places of
residences of the owners of same;
      (3)   In the event that application is made for the issuance of a license
to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set
forth the names and places of residence of those owning the business;
      (4)   In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a
license to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall set forth the
names and places of residences of the officers or partners thereof;
      (5)   Any further information which the Collector may require to enable
him to issue the type of license applied for.
(Ord. 74-19, passed 9-9-74)
   (B)   Denial of application. If the City Manager, upon reading the
application shall be of the opinion that the granting of the license would
endanger the public health, safety or morals, he may refer such application to
the Council, who shall consider the application at its next regular or an
earlier called special meeting, and, if the Council, after granting the
applicant a hearing, shall by resolution declare that the granting of the
application will, in its judgment, endanger the public health, safety or
morals, the application may be denied.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-10)
§ 110.11 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector with respect to the
issuance or refusal to issue such license may appeal to the Council by filing a
notice of appeal with the Clerk of the Council. The Council shall thereupon fix
a time and place for hearing such appeal. The Clerk of the Council shall give
notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally
or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Riverbank, California,
postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. The
Council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal.
No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this
chapter.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-11)
§ 110.12 ADDITIONAL POWER OF COLLECTOR.
   In addition to all other power conferred upon him, the Collector shall have
the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required
sworn statement or application for a period not exceeding 30 days, and in such
case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-12)
§ 110.13 LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE; CHANGED LOCATION AND OWNERSHIP.
   No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable, provided
that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a
business at a particular place, such licensee may have the license amended to
authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under the license at
some other location to which the business is or is to be moved, and provided
further that transfer, whether by sale or otherwise, to another person under
such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is
substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer, shall not
be prohibited by this section. For the purpose of this section stockholders,
bondholders, partnerships, or other persons holding an interest in a
corporation or other entity herein defined to be a person are regarded as
having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-13)
§ 110.14 DUPLICATE LICENSE.
   A duplicate license may be issued by the Collector to replace any license
previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee
filing claim of such fact, and, at the time of filing such statement, paying to
the Collector a duplicate license fee of $1.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-14)
§ 110.15 POSTING AND KEEPING LICENSES.
   (A)   Every person having a license under the provisions of this chapter
shall place and exhibit such license at all times while in force in some
conspicuous place in his or her place of business where patrons of the business
may see the same when in the customary place for dealing with the persons
carrying on such business.
   (B)   Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at
a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at
all times while transacting and carrying on the business for which it is
issued, unless other arrangements are made with the Collector.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-15)
§ 110.16 LICENSE PAYMENTS; WHEN DUE.
   License tax payments are to be paid in advance quarterly, and are due on
January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1. License tax payments may also be made
annually. Such annual payments are to be paid in advance and are due on October
1 each year.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-16)
§ 110.17 DELINQUENT TAXES.
   (A)   A penalty of 25% of the amount of the license tax shall be imposed and
collected in each instance where the license tax is not paid on the thirtieth
of the month after the due date.
   (B)   No license shall be issued, nor one which has been suspended or
revoked shall be reinstated or reissued, to any person, who at the time of
applying therefor is indebted to the city for any delinquent business license
taxes.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-17) (Ord. 74-19, passed 9-9-74)
§ 110.18 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX FEES.
   (A)   General license fee.
      (1)   Every person who engages in business within the city or who has a
fixed place of business inside the city shall pay a license fee as follows:
   Number of Employees                     Annual Fee
   Sole proprietor                            $75
      1 - 25                              $75
      26 - 50                              $125
      51 - over                           $200
   One time set up charge for new businesses                  $25
   Contractors/Subcontractors                        $120 or $30 quarterly fee
      (2)   SB 1186 requires the city to add a separate line item $1.00 fee to
business license applications. That fee is hereby added to all business license
applications.
   (B)   Special and seasonal activities.
      (1)   For profit organizations:
         Christmas tree sales                      $50
         Fireworks stand                     $50 per day
         Carnivals                        $50 per day
         Circuses                        $50 per day
         Other similar uses                     $50 per day
      (2)   For nonprofit organizations. The business license fees for the
special and seasonal activities shall be waived for all nonprofit
organizations, as indicated under the exemptions clause of § 110.08(I).
   (C)   Garage sales. Garage sales conducted in any residentially zoned area
shall be subject to the limitations of any "home occupation" as set forth in
the Code of Ordinances.
      (1)   All garage sales must be licensed by the city.
      (2)   The license fee for a garage sale shall be $5 per calendar year
which entitles the licensee to hold two garage sales per calendar year,
provided that each sale lasts no longer than three consecutive days.
   (D)   Community special events; permit requirements.
      (1)   No person shall conduct or sponsor a community special event
without first obtaining a permit and paying the applicable fees thereto set by
City Council resolution. Applications for permits shall be made to the Parks
and Recreation Department on forms supplied by the Parks and Recreation
Department. The applications shall be made at least 60 days prior to the
proposed date for the community special event. Failure to file an application
60 days in advance of the proposed date for the community special event may not
necessarily result in automatic denial of the permit, but where there is
insufficient time for staff review of the application, the permit shall be
automatically denied.
      (2)   All applications for permits shall be reviewed and approved by the
Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee, the Director of
Development Services or his or her designee, by the Sheriff's Department, and
any other City Department that may be involved in preparation for the event
prior to being submitted to the City Council or City Manager for final
approval, subject to the conditions listed below. The event organizer present
at the event shall display a copy of the approved permit at all times the event
is in operation.
         (a)   A "new" community special event that has not at one time been
approved to occur in the City of Riverbank by the City Council shall be
presented to the City Council for final approval.
         (b)   Any community special event that demands the City of Riverbank
expend a significant amount of city staff time, funds, fee waivers, or
resources, as determined by the City Manager, shall be presented to the City
Council for final approval.
         (c)   An annual community special event that has at one time been
previously approved by the City Council and does not demand the City of
Riverbank expend a significant amount of city staff time, funds, fee waivers,
or resources, as determined by the City Manager, may thereafter be approved by
the City Manager.
      (3)   As used in this subsection "community special event" shall be
construed and understood as follows:
         (a)   Any street fair, circus, farmers market, street market, art and
craft show, exhibition (i.e., car show, air show), carnival, festival, or
indoor or outdoor musical concert or other social event or gathering which
occurs on a city street, sidewalk, alley or other street right-of-way, city
park, or city facilities:
            1.   Which is likely to obstruct, delay, or interfere with the
normal flow of pedestrian traffic;
            2.   Whose participants are likely not to comply with traffic laws
and controls; or
            3.   Which involves the use or impacts upon other public property
or facilities and the provision of city public safety services in response
thereto.
         (b)   Community special event shall not include events that are
organized for the principle purpose of the exercising free speech rights. "Free
speech rights" means expressive activity, protected by the First Amendment of
the United States Constitution or Article 1, Section 2, of the California
Constitution.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-18) (Ord. 74-19, passed 9-9-74; Am. Ord. 77-7, passed 7-25-77;
Am. Ord. 83-4, passed 5-23-83; Am. Ord. 92-20, passed 12-14-92; Am. Ord. 2015-
005, passed 3-10-15)
Cross-reference:
   Fireworks stands specifications, see §
92.17
   Home occupations, see §§
153.265 through
153.267
§ 110.19 DELIVERY BY VEHICLE.
   Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city, and not
being herein otherwise licensed or classified, who delivers goods, wares or
merchandise of any kind by the use of vehicles in the city, shall pay the
license tax at the rate of $10 per quarter.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-19)
§ 110.20 OUTSIDE BUSINESS.
   (A)   Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city, and
not being herein otherwise licensed or classified, who delivers goods, wares,
or merchandise of any kind by the use of vehicles in the city, shall pay a
license fee at a rate set by the City Council, as amended time to time.
   (B)   Division (A) shall apply to all cannabis businesses that provide
delivery service within the city unless that business is expressly exempt from
this section.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17)
§ 110.21 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Collector may make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter, and the Sheriff's Commanding Officer shall render
such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required
by the Collector or the City Council.
   (B)   The Collector in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him
hereunder, and acting through his deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall
examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain
whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
   (C)   The Collector and each and all of his assistants and any police
officer shall have the power and authority (upon obtaining an inspection
warrant therefor) to enter, free of charge, and demand an exhibition of its
license. Any person having such license theretofore issued, in his possession
or under his control, who wilfully fails to exhibit the same on demand, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided for by the
provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Collector and each of
his assistants to cause a complaint to be filed against and all persons found
to be violating any of said provisions.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-21)
§ 110.22 LICENSE TAX A DEBT.
   The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the
name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any
delinquent license tax and penalties.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-22)
§ 110.23 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or
more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the
purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-23)
§ 110.24 EFFECT ON PAST ACTIONS, UNEXPIRED LICENSES.
   (A)   Neither the adoption of this chapter nor its superseding of any
portion of any other ordinance of the city shall in any manner be construed to
affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the
effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal
provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the
validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted,
filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall
continue in full force and effect.
   (B)   Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any person by
the city and the tax paid for the business for which the license has been
issued under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted and the term of
the license has not expired, then the license as prescribed for the business by
this chapter shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of such
unexpired license.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-24)
§ 110.25 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly or
intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this city any
material fact in procuring the license or permit herein provided for shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-25)
§ 110.26 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The City Council reserves the right to revoke any license issued under this
chapter upon good cause shown. Good cause includes but is not limited to
violations of this chapter or violations of other provisions of this code which
bear a rational relationship to the licensee's qualifications to hold such a
license, including but not limited to violations involving fraud, theft, and
dishonesty. No license shall be revoked until after a hearing before the City
Council, notice of which hearing shall be given to a license holder not less
than 15 days in advance of the date of such hearing. This notice shall either
be delivered to the licensee personally, or left at his place of business, if
he conducts his business in a bona fide and established place in the city, or
by mailing the notice to him at the mailing address set forth on his
application. Upon revocation of a license, the City Council may, in such cases
as it deems proper, order refunded to the person whose license is revoked any
prepaid license fees of such person.
(`67 Code, § 6-1-27) (Ord. 83-4, passed 5-23-83)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
111.01   Drinking in public places prohibited
   
111.02   Exceptions
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages prohibited in massage/bodywork establishments, see §
119.14
   Alcoholic beverages prohibited in parks, see §
94.06
   Retail sale of alcoholic beverages, see §§
153.360 et seq.
§ 111.01 DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage or have in his or her
possession an open container of an alcoholic beverage on any public street,
sidewalk, alley or walkway, municipal park or on any private lot held open to
the public, or on any public parking lot.
(‘67 Code, § 7-3-7) (Ord. 2009-008, passed 9-14-09)
§ 111.02 EXCEPTIONS.
   No alcoholic beverages can be consumed at community facilities, Plaza Del
Rio or the Cheese and Wine Exposition without complying with the following:
   (A)   A permit and/or agreement must be obtained from the Recreation
Department. Permits must be approved by the Chief of Police Services and
Director of Parks and Recreation, whereas agreements will only require approval
by the Director of Parks and Recreation, or designee;
   (B)   Depending upon the event, specific guidelines may be set forth by the
Chief of Police Services and Director of Parks and Recreation. The Chief of
Police, or designee, has the expressed authority to require additional serving
procedures and modifications, including revocation of the permit at any time;
   (C)   Security officers, sheriff personnel, site monitors, custodians and
other personnel may be required for public safety, health and welfare;
   (D)   Alcohol shall only be permitted at the Plaza Del Rio if used by a
Riverbank Community organization or Riverbank nonprofit organization. Outside
nonprofits will be considered for approved use on a case by case basis;
   (E)   Community facilities can be used by the general public for weddings,
baby showers, dances and the like and need only be approved by the Parks and
Recreation Director;
   (F)   The city shall require a certificate of insurance, and an additionally
ensured endorsement naming the city, in the amount of $1,000,000;
   (G)   The City Council shall, by resolution, establish administrative fees
and other fees for staffing, security and clean-up; and
   (H)   Any organization or person selling alcohol without a permit is subject
to a fine of up to $250, and shall be banned from such use in the future.
(‘67 Code, §§ 6-11-1 and 6-11-2) (Ord. 2009-008, passed 9-14-09)
CHAPTER 112: BINGO GAMES
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Incorporation of state law
   
112.03   Bingo games permitted for charitable purpose
   
112.04   Violation
Permits
   
112.15   Permit required
   
112.16   Organizations eligible for permit
   
112.17   Application; fees
   
112.18   Contents of application
   
112.19   Investigation of applicant
   
112.20   Contents of permit
   
112.21   Bingo games conducted only on permittee's property
   
112.22   Posting of permit
   
112.23   Suspension or revocation of permit; appeal
Operating Regulations
   
112.35   Bingo game rules and regulations
   
112.36   Manner of operation
   
112.37   Hours of operation
   
112.38   Members operating and staffing games
   
112.39   Regulation of participants
   
112.40   Maximum amount of prize
   
112.41   Profits to be kept in special fund or account
   
112.42   Inspection of books, records or accounts
   
112.43   Restricted financial interests
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLOWABLE ELECTRONIC BINGO AID. An electronic device which satisfies the
following criteria:
      (1)   An electronic bingo aid must function primarily as an electronic
aid or labor saving device that requires some interaction between the player
and the device, but where the numbers are drawn independently and apart from
the device, and the device can only be utilized in a common bingo game along
with other players competing for a common, preannounced prize;
      (2)   In addition to being tested and approved, an electronic bingo aid
must provide for accountability, integrity, security and fairness of the game.
As such all electronic cards in play during any bingo game must be fully
accounted for at any time during and after the game by an independent
accounting means and must be fully verifiable at any time by an independent
verification means;
      (3)   Electronic cards available to players shall be part of a
predetermined deck, group or series of cards, no two of which shall be alike,
and electronic cards shall not be arranged or distributed so as to give any
player preference to any particular card. All cards must have an equal chance
of winning;
      (4)   In order to insure the integrity and fairness, the electronic aid
shall preclude any unauthorized transfer or substitution of electronic cards
during (after the start of) any bingo game;
      (5)   As the primary function of the system must be to assist the bingo
player as he/she plays bingo, the system must not generate the bingo numbers
utilized in the game. Upon the player calling “bingo”, the player's winning
card must be simultaneously displayed to all players playing bingo to allow all
players the opportunity to verify the winning card;
      (6)   The particular arrangement of numbers required to win a particular
game shall be clearly displayed on or through the electronic aid before the
start of the game without the necessity of any player action or inaction; and
      (7)   The called bingo numbers must be presented on the electronic aid as
they are announced by the bingo caller without the necessity for any player
action or inaction.
   BINGO. A game of chance in which each player receives a bingo card, either
paper, hard card, or electronic representation thereof. Each bingo card,
whether paper card, hard card or electronic representation thereof, is defined
as a series of five vertical rows of five predetermined numbers ranging from 1
through 75. Numbers are drawn or otherwise obtained by chance, from a set of
consecutively numbered balls of essentially equal size, weight, and shape, and
publicly displayed or otherwise publicly made known. The player first having a
specified patterned of announced numbers appearing on his/her card, upon
verification by an authorized person and/or through electronic or computer
verification means or otherwise, shall be declared the winner. No electronic
generation of numbers is permitted in any bingo game allowed under this
chapter.
   BINGO EQUIPMENT. The receptacle from which the numbered objects (bingo
balls) are drawn, the display board upon which the numbered objects are
displayed, the master board or bingo rack upon which the numbered objects are
placed upon being drawn, bingo cards (electronic representations or otherwise),
and any and all computer and/or electronic systems which are utilized as
electronic aids in playing and verifying bingo, and any and all other articles
essential to the operation, conduct, and playing of bingo.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-1) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.02 INCORPORATION OF STATE LAW.
   All of the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 326.5 as it now exists and as
amended hereafter are incorporated in this chapter by reference as if set forth
in full and shall apply to every bingo game except as to more restrictive
provisions which are set forth in this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-25) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.03 BINGO GAMES PERMITTED FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSE.
   The city, pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 326.5, does hereby authorize and
provide for the conduct of bingo games by nonprofit organizations for
charitable purposes in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-2) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.04 VIOLATION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or by Cal. Penal Code § 326.5,
every violation of this chapter shall be an infraction.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-26) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
PERMITS
§ 112.15 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm, corporation, organization or association shall engage in,
carry on, maintain, conduct, or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained
or conducted a bingo game in the city without first having secured a permit
from the Sheriff's Commanding Officer of the city in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, and without complying with the rules and
regulations contained or authorized in this chapter pertaining to the operation
of bingo games.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-3) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.16 ORGANIZATIONS ELIGIBLE FOR PERMIT.
   Such permits may be issued only to nonprofit organizations exempted from the
payment of the bank and corporation tax by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 23701a,
23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23071f, 23701g, and 23701l and by mobile home park
associations and senior citizens organizations.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-4) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.17 APPLICATION; FEES.
   (A)   Applications for a permit to conduct bingo games pursuant to this
chapter shall be submitted to the Sheriff's Commanding Officer on forms to be
provided by the city. The applicant shall pay an application fee of $50 upon
the filing of such an application. If the application is granted, a permit
shall be issued for a term of one year from the date of issuance, and such
permit shall be subject to an annual renewal, and the payment of a $50 annual
renewal fee.
   (B)   If an application for a permit to conduct bingo games is denied by the
city, one-half of the application fee shall be refunded to the organization
making the application.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-5) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
   (C)   In lieu of the license fee permitted under division (A), the city may
impose a license fee of $ 50 paid upon application. If an application for a
license is denied, one-half of the application fee shall be refunded to the
organization. An additional fee for law enforcement and public safety costs
incurred by the city, county, or city and county that are directly related to
bingo activities may be imposed and shall be collected monthly by the city,
county, or city and county issuing the license; however, the fee shall not
exceed the actual costs incurred in providing the service.
(Cal. Penal Code § 326.5(l)(2)
§ 112.18 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   The application for a permit shall contain the following:
   (A)   The name and mailing address of the applicant organization.
   (B)   Proof that the applicant is an eligible organization under §
112.16, including a letter or other evidence from the State Franchise Tax Board
showing that the applicant is exempted from the payment of the bank and
corporation tax by a pertinent section of the Revenue and Taxation Code. If the
applicant is a mobile home park association or senior citizen organization,
other proof shall be provided as required by the Sheriff's Commanding Officer.
   (C)   A list of the duly elected officers of the organization certified by
the secretary thereof.
   (D)   The signatures of at least two officers, including the presiding
officer of the organization.
   (E)   The location, including the street number, of the specific property
within the city owned or leased by the applicant on which property bingo games
will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of the room in which
bingo will be played and the number of off-street parking places.
   (F)   A statement certified by the secretary of the organization that the
applicant has received and has reviewed copies of this chapter, the authorized
rules of play for bingo games, and Cal. Penal Code § 326.5, and has been
advised that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the Sheriff's
Commanding Officer upon violation of any of such provisions.
   (G)   The location where all records, account books and ledgers pertaining
to the operation of bingo games by the organization will be kept, the location
of the bank account in which the bingo receipts will be placed, and an
authorization for the city to inspect and audit the records, books and
accounts.
   (H)   Such other information as the Sheriff's Commanding Officer may
require.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-6) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.19 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the completed application, the Sheriff's Commanding
Officer shall make an investigation to determine if all of the statements in
the application are true and shall refer the application to the Community
Development Director of the city or the Chief Building Inspector, the County
Health Department and the Fire District Fire Chief to determine if the
appropriate zoning regulations, building codes, health regulations and the
provisions of the Uniform Fire Code have been or will be complied with.
   (B)   The Sheriff's Commanding Officer may refuse to issue a permit if any
officer of the organization or any operator mentioned in
§ 112.38:
      (1)   Has a felony conviction.
      (2)   Has a conviction for theft, fraud, gambling, crimes involving moral
turpitude or bingo ordinance violations in this or any other city or county.
      (3)   Is under investigation for a criminal offense set forth in
divisions (A) and (B) of this section by any law enforcement agency.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-7) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.20 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified, under the law,
to conduct bingo games, the Sheriff's Commanding Officer shall issue a permit
for one year to the applicant, which shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name of the organization to which the license is issued.
   (B)   The address and/or description of the location where bingo games are
authorized to be conducted.
   (C)   The date of the expiration of such license.
   (D)   The number of players permitted.
   (E)   Such other information as may be required by the Sheriff's Commanding
Officer for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-8) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.21 BINGO GAMES CONDUCTED ONLY ON PERMITTEE'S PROPERTY.
   A permit to conduct bingo games shall be issued only for property owned or
leased by the permittee, or property who's use has been donated to the
organization be used or leased exclusively by or donated exclusively to such
organization. No permit shall be issued unless there is a least one off-street
parking space for each four persons set forth in the occupancy capacity of the
premises pursuant to
§ 112.39(B). A new permit must be obtained for a change of address by an
eligible organization, upon application of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-9) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.22 POSTING OF PERMIT.
   An organization granted a permit pursuant to this chapter shall not conduct
or permit to be conducted a bingo game unless the permit is posted in a
conspicuous place during the conduct of such game. The permittee shall produce
and exhibit the same, when applying for renewal hereof, and whenever requested
to do so by any peace officer or officer authorized by
§ 112.39 to issue or inspect the premises. Every person engaged in the conduct
or operation of a bingo game shall wear an identification tag of a type and
form required by the Sheriff's Commanding Officer.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-10) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.23 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT; APPEAL.
   (A)   Whenever it appears to the Sheriff's Commanding Officer or his
authorized representative that a permittee is conducting a bingo game in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, he shall have the authority
to summarily suspend the permit and any further operation of any bingo game.
   (B)   The suspension order issued under division (A) of this section shall
also constitute notice of proposed revocation. The permittee shall be notified
that it shall have ten days from the date of such order to request in writing a
hearing before the Sheriff's Commanding Officer to determine whether the permit
should be revoked. If the permittee fails to request in writing such hearing
before the Sheriff's Commanding Officer within the period, the Sheriff's
Commanding Officer may revoke the permit.
   (C)   In situations other than a summary suspension, if it appears to the
Sheriff's Commanding Officer that any permittee is conducting bingo games in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or that a permit was
obtained by misrepresentation, the permit may be revoked. Written notice of
such proposed revocation shall be given by depositing in the United States mail
a notice directed to the permittee at the address given in the application. The
notice shall set forth the reasons for the proposed revocation, and shall
notify the permittee that it has ten days in which to file a written request
for a hearing before the Sheriff's Commanding Officer.
   (D)   In case of a summary suspension or notice of revocation, the Sheriff's
Commanding Officer shall provide a hearing within 15 days after receipt of a
written request from the permittee at which hearing the permittee may present
oral or written evidence why the permit should not be revoked. Notice of the
time and place of such hearing shall be given to the permittee by depositing it
in the United States mail at least ten days before the hearing to the address
given in the application.
   (E)   If the permit is revoked, written notice shall be given the permittee
within 25 days of the close of the hearing. Notice of revocation shall be given
by United States mail. The permittee will be presumed to have received the
notice within five days after mailing. It shall be unlawful for any
organization whose permit is revoked under this section to conduct any bingo
game in the city unless the City Council, on appeal, reinstates the permit.
   (F)   Any person who conducts a bingo game after summary suspension of a
permit or after revocation of a permit is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (G)   Any organization whose permit is revoked may not apply for a permit to
conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from the date of such
revocation, provided, however, that if the ground for revocation is
cancellation of the exemption granted under the Revenue and Taxation Code, such
organization may again reapply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of the
exemption.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-11)
   (H)   Any holder of a permit whose license is revoked under this chapter
shall have the right, after receiving notice in writing of the revocation, to
file a written appeal to the City Council.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-12)
(Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
OPERATING REGULATIONS
§ 112.35 BINGO GAME RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Sheriff's Commanding Officer shall adopt and print rules of play for the
conduct and operation of bingo games and for the equipment and allowable
electronic bingo aids which shall be used and shall deliver a copy to each
applicant. Copies shall be made available by the Riverbank Police Services
Division to any person who so requests. The permittee shall post in a
conspicuous place during the conduct of any bingo game the authorized rules of
play for the game.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-24) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.36 MANNER OF OPERATION.
   No bingo game shall be operated in violation of any law or in a manner which
shall constitute a public nuisance.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-19) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.37 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No permittee shall conduct bingo games more than six hours out of any one
day. No bingo game shall be conducted before 9:00 a.m. or after 12:00 a.m.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-13) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.38 MEMBERS OPERATING AND STAFFING GAMES.
   A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the permittee.
Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game.
Only the permittee shall operate a bingo game, or participate in the promotion,
supervision or any other phase of a bingo game. No person under the age of 18
years may operate or participate in the operation of any bingo game. Pursuant
to Cal. Penal Code § 326.5(h), this section does not preclude the employment of
security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at a
bingo game by the organization conducting the bingo game.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-14) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.39 REGULATION OF PARTICIPANTS.
   (A)   All bingo games shall be open to the public. All bingo games,
equipment, facilities and property shall be open to inspection by members of
the Riverbank Police Services Division, Fire Department, Health Department and
Senior Building Inspector.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-15)
   (B)   Notwithstanding that bingo games shall be open to the public,
attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the
room in which such game is conducted as determined by the Fire Department and
the Senior Building Inspector for the city in accordance with applicable codes,
laws and regulations.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-16)
   (C)   No person shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game, unless
the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game
is being conducted. No permittee shall issue chips or money to a patron on
credit or loan (including, but not limited to, IOUs and checks to be held) or
allow any patron to otherwise play on credit.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-17)
   (D)   No person who is in a state of intoxication shall be allowed to
participate in a bingo game, and no person under the age of 18 years shall be
allowed to participate in any bingo games.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-18) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.40 MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF PRIZE.
   The total value of a prize or prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo
game shall not exceed $250 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game
which is held.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-20) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.41 PROFITS TO BE KEPT IN SPECIAL FUND OR ACCOUNT.
   (A)   With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and
corporation tax by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701d, all profits derived from a
bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be
commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for
charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct
bingo games pursuant to this chapter, all proceeds derived from a bingo game
shall not be commingled with any other fund or account.
   (B)   Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as
follows:
      (1)   Such proceeds may be used for prizes.
(Cal. Penal Code § 326.5(k)(1)) (`67 Code, § 6-9-21) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-
93)
      (2)   A portion of the proceeds, not to exceed 20% of the proceeds before
the deduction for prizes, or $2,000 per month, whichever is less, may be used
for the rental of property and for overhead, including the purchase of bingo
equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security personnel.
(Cal. Penal Code § 326.5(k)(2))
      (3)   The proceeds may be used to pay license fees.
(Cal. Penal Code § 326.5(k)(3))
§ 112.42 INSPECTION OF BOOKS, RECORDS OR ACCOUNTS.
   The permittee shall keep full and accurate records of the income and
expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct,
promotion, supervision, or any other phase of bingo games which are authorized
by this chapter. The city, by and through its authorized officers, shall have
the right to examine and audit such records at reasonable times, and the
permittee shall fully cooperate with the city by making such records available.
Failure to so cooperate shall be a violation of this chapter and grounds for
revocation of the permit.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-22) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
§ 112.43 RESTRICTED FINANCIAL INTERESTS.
   No individual, cooperation, partnership or other legal entity except the
organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall hold a financial interest
in the conduct of such bingo game.
(`67 Code, § 6-9-23) (Ord. 93-03, passed 9-13-93)
CHAPTER 113: CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
113.001   Title
   
113.002   Definitions
Franchise Provisions
   
113.015   Franchise to operate
   
113.016   Duration of franchise
   
113.017   Franchise payments
   
113.018   Limitations of franchise
   
113.019   Application for franchise
   
113.020   Acceptance of franchise
Rights Reserved to the City
   
113.030   Eminent domain
   
113.031   Reservation of rights
   
113.032   Additional franchises
   
113.033   Rules and regulations
   
113.034   Governmental power
   
113.035   Use of poles
Permits, Installation, Design, and Construction
   
113.045   Permits and authorizations
   
113.046   System design
   
113.047   Geographical coverage
   
113.048   System construction schedule
   
113.049   Undergrounding
   
113.050   Service connections
   
113.051   Line extensions
Property of Grantee
   
113.065   Locations to be approved by city
   
113.066   Interference
   
113.067   Removal and abandonment of property of grantee
   
113.068   Changes required by public improvements
Liability, Indemnification, and Termination
   
113.080   Indemnification
   
113.081   Defense costs
   
113.082   Insurance
   
113.083   Performance bond
   
113.084   Evidence
   
113.085   No excuse
   
113.086   Sanctions
   
113.087   Credits to subscribers; determination of right to credit
   
113.088   Termination of franchise for cause; procedures
   
113.089   Restoration of property
Inspections and Evaluation
   
113.100   Inspection of property and records
   
113.101   Operational standards, evaluation sessions
Minimum Consumer Protection and Service Standards
   
113.115   Customer service
   
113.116   Efficient service
   
113.117   Service log
   
113.118   Service call notice
   
113.119   Subscriber complaints
   
113.120   Compliance with customer service standards
   
113.121   Identification cards
   
113.122   Continued operation of system
Additional Provisions
   
113.135   Work to be done by city upon failure of grantee
   
113.136   City Clerk
   
113.137   Service to public facilities/PEG
   
113.138   Emergency service
   
113.139   Limitations
   
113.140   Refusal of service
   
113.141   Subscription agreement
   
113.142   Right of grantee
   
113.143   Use of utility poles and facilities
Violations
   
113.155   Franchise required
   
113.156   Pirating
   
113.157   Tampering
   
113.158   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the City of Riverbank Cable
Television Ordinance and shall be referred to herein as “this chapter.”
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CABLE ACT. Refers to the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended
and supplemented by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992, and any amendments thereto as codified in 47 USC 325(b) and 521 et
seq.
   CABLE SYSTEM. A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service, which includes video programming and FM
radio service, and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a
community, but shall not include a facility that serves only to retransmit the
television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; a facility
that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple dwellings under common
ownership, control or management, unless such facility or facilities uses any
public right-of-way; a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole
or in part, to the provisions of 47 USC 201 through 226, except that such
facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 USC
541) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video
programming directly to subscribers; or any facilities of any electric utility
used solely for operating its electric utility systems.
   COUNCIL. The present highest governing body of the city or any future board
constituting the legislative body of the city.
   FRANCHISE. Any authorization granted pursuant to this chapter in terms of a
franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable system in the city, including any referenced specifications,
franchise applications and other related material within such agreement.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. An agreement between the city and grantee, approved by
ordinance or resolution of the Council, containing the specific provisions of
the franchise granted, including any referenced specifications, franchise
applications and other related material within such agreement.
   FRANCHISE FEE. The tax, fee or assessment to be paid by grantee to grantor
solely because of grantee's operation of a cable system within the franchise
territory. Such fee does not include: any capital costs which are required by
the franchise to be incurred by the grantee for public, educational, or
governmental access facilities; any tax, fee, or assessment of general
applicability; or to the extent allowed by law, any franchise application or
renewal fees or consulting fee reimbursements payable by the grantee to the
city.
   FRANCHISE TERRITORY. The portion of the city defined in the franchise
agreement for which a franchise is granted.
   GRANTEE. The person or entity to whom or which a franchise, as defined
above, is properly granted by the Council under this chapter, and the lawful
successor, transferee or assignee of the person or entity, pursuant to
§ 113.018(D) hereto.
   GROSS QUARTERLY RECEIPTS. All amounts which are received directly or
indirectly, by grantee from or in connection with the operation of its cable
system during the first, second, third or fourth three-month period in any year
(or portion thereof). Gross quarterly receipts shall include receipts from the
distribution of any basic, premium, or pay-per-view service over the cable
system to any subscriber; installation, reconnection and similar fees; fees
paid for channels designated for commercial use; converter rentals or sales;
studio and other facility or equipment rentals, other than those not associated
with the operation of the system; advertising revenues (based on the percentage
of subscribers in the franchise territory); revenue derived from the sale of
products advertised or promoted on the system, to the extent such revenue
represents payment, in whole or in part, for the use of a channel on the
system. Gross quarterly receipts shall also include the gross revenue of any
other person which is derived directly or indirectly from or in connections
with the operation of the system, but only to the extent that the revenue is
derived through a means which has the effect of avoiding payment of franchise
fees to the city that would otherwise be due hereunder and in no event shall it
include any amount received by any person for management or consulting services
related to the cable system. Gross quarterly receipts shall not include:
revenue of any person, including, without limitation, an affiliated person or
supplier of programming to grantee, to the extent that the revenue is also
included in the gross quarterly receipts of grantee; taxes or other charges
imposed by law on subscribers or other person which grantee collects and which
grantee passes on, in full, to the applicable authority or authorities; amounts
collected by grantee from subscribers on behalf of commercial use or access
channel programmers, to the extent that the amounts are passed on in full by
grantee to the programmers; any investment income earned by grantee, or
receipts from grantee's sale of assets; uncollected amounts, provided, however,
that any amounts later collected shall be included immediately upon receipt by
grantee; the value of any free service; or the value of any public, educational
or governmental services unauthorized and required by this agreement.
   PROPERTY OF GRANTEE. All property owned, installed or used by a grantee in
the conduct of a television business in the city under the authority of a
franchise.
   STREET. The surface of and the space above and below any public street,
road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive,
easements, licenses, permits, rights-of-way of any kind or nature whatsoever
and public property and areas now or hereafter existing as such within the
city.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
FRANCHISE PROVISIONS
§ 113.015 FRANCHISE TO OPERATE.
   (A)   Grant. Subject to applicable state and federal law, a nonexclusive
franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable system within all or any
portion of the city may be granted by the Council to any person or entity,
whether currently operating under an existing franchise or not, who or which
offers to furnish and provide such services pursuant to the terms of this
chapter.
   (B)   Limitation. No provision of this chapter may be deemed or construed as
to require the granting of a franchise when in the opinion of the Council it is
in the public interest to restrict the number of grantees to one or more.
   (C)   Use of public streets and highways. Any such franchise shall authorize
and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a
cable system in the city, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct,
repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon,
across, and along any public street or highway within the area of the
franchise, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments, and other property as
may be necessary and appurtenant to the cable system; and in addition, so to
use, operate, and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased
from other persons, firms or corporations, including but not limited to any
public utility or other grantee franchises or permitted to do business in the
area of the franchise.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.016 DURATION OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Duration. No franchise granted by the Council under this chapter shall
be for a term longer than 15 years following the effective date (as herein
defined) of such franchise or any renewal thereof.
   (B)   Effective date. The effective date of the franchise shall be the date
on which the franchise agreement has been executed or the date on which the
resolution of the Council approving the execution of the franchise becomes
effective, whichever is later. Notwithstanding the foregoing, city and the
grantee may agree on a specific effective date in the franchise agreement,
which shall thereafter be binding on the parties.
   (C)   Termination. The franchise shall terminate without further action by
the city at the end of the term, provided, however, that the city, at or before
the end of the term, retains the exclusive power to grant an extension, or a
renewal of the franchise to grantee. Any termination or revocation of the
franchise prior to its terms shall be executed in accordance with 47 USC 547.
   (D)   Franchise renewal. The renewal procedure specified in 47 USC 546
shall, if the grantee requests, be commenced by the city during the six month
period which begins three years prior to the expiration of the term of the
franchise. Any such renewal shall also be subject to the requirements of
§ 113.019 hereunder, which relate to the application for a franchise.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.017 FRANCHISE PAYMENTS.
   (A)   Franchise fee.
      (1)   Any grantee shall pay to the city, during the life of the
franchise, a sum equal to 5% of the gross quarterly receipts of the grantee,
provided, however, that in no event shall the franchise fee for any 12-month
period ever exceed 5% of the sum of the grantee's gross quarterly receipts for
such period. Grantee shall also pay to the city when due such other sums as may
be provided for in the franchise agreement. In no event shall the fee be more
than that authorized by applicable federal and state law. Such fee by the
grantee to the city shall be payable on or before the thirtieth day following
the end of each respective calendar quarter during the term of the franchise,
by delivery of the same to the City Clerk. All payments made hereunder shall be
made in lieu of any business license, occupation tax or similar levy.
      (2)   In the event that the above payments and financial statements are
not received by the city within ten days of the specified due dates, grantee
shall pay to the city a late charge to cover administrative, bookkeeping and
other expenses attendant thereto, of 2% of the amount due for such calendar
quarter plus interest at the rate of 10% per annum on any late payment computed
from the date due to the date of payment.
   (B)   Financial statement. The grantee shall file with the city, within 60
days after the expiration of any calendar year (or portion thereof) during
which such franchise is in force, a financial statement prepared by an
independent certified public accountant who is satisfactory to the Council and
certified by the chief financial officer of the grantee, showing receipts of
grantee during the calendar quarters (or portion thereof in the case of an
initial or final quarter) in the preceding calendar year.
   (C)   Inspection; audit. Upon written request made at least seven days in
advance during normal business hours, any duly authorized representative of the
city shall have the right to inspect and audit the grantee's records showing
the gross quarterly receipts from which its franchise fee payments are
computed. Any such inspection or audit shall take place within 36 months
following the respective month and records thereof in question. If an
underpayment in excess of 5% of the franchise fee for any calendar quarter is
determined in such inspection or audit conducted by or at the direction of the
city, then the cost of such inspection or audit shall be borne by the grantee.
   (D)   Acceptance by city. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as
a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim that the city may have
for any sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any other
obligation hereunder.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.018 LIMITATIONS OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Nonexclusive. Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be
nonexclusive.
   (B)   Exemptions. No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by
any franchise except those specifically prescribed herein, in the franchise
agreement or as subsequently determined by the Council and expressed by
resolution.
   (C)   Subordination. Any privilege claimed under any franchise by the
grantee in any public street or other public property shall be subordinate to
any prior lawful occupancy of the streets or other public property.
   (D)   Transfer.
      (1)   Any franchise granted hereunder shall be a privilege to be held in
personal trust by the original grantee. Neither the franchise, nor any rights
or obligations of the grantee pursuant to the franchise or cable system shall
be transferred in part or as a whole, by assignment, trust, mortgage, lease,
sublease, pledge or other hypothecation or by forced or involuntary sale, or by
voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, nor shall the title to the
franchise or system, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest
therein, pass to or vest in any person or entity, nor shall a change in control
(20% or more) of grantee occur, either by act of the grantee, by operation of
law or otherwise, in each case, without the prior consent of the Council
expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be
prescribed. The consent of the Council may not be unreasonably withheld,
provided, however, that any proposed assignee must show complete financial and
technical ability to operate a franchise hereunder and must agree to comply
with all provisions of this chapter and any preexisting agreements between the
city and grantee.
      (2)   Nothing contained in this division (D) shall be deemed to prohibit
or require city approval of any assignment, pledge, lease, sublease, mortgage,
or other transfer or hypothecation of all or any part of the stock of (or other
evidence if ownership in) or assets (not including the franchise) of the
company or the system, or any right or interest therein, for securing an
indebtedness, provided that each such assignment, pledge, lease, sublease,
mortgage, or other transfer or hypothecation shall be subject to the rights of
the city pursuant to this agreement, or applicable law, and such rights of the
city shall be recognized in each such hypothecation agreement between grantee
and any such creditor.
      (3)   The restrictions contained in this division (D) shall not apply to
any transfer or hypothecation, assignment, or other disposition, between or
among persons in common control with the grantee, provided that in such
instances or any other instances where any change in the ownership of grantee
is to be undertaken, prior written notice of any such change shall be provided
to the city.
      (4)   A grantee shall file written notice with the city as soon as it
acquires knowledge of any impending transaction or other event for which the
consent of the city is required under this division (D). The notice shall state
the name and address of the interested parties in the transaction, and enclose
a copy of any executed agreement between the interested parties. Furthermore,
the grantee shall agree to provide any and all information and documentation as
may be reasonably requested by the city in connection with its review of any
proposed transfer. By its acceptance of the franchise, the grantee agrees that
any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the city shall
constitute a violation of the franchise by grantee.
      (5)   Any such transfer shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of
the city under any franchise agreement granted hereunder, and the transferee
shall acknowledge in writing such subordination and agreement to comply with
and be bound by all of the terms, conditions, and requirements of the franchise
agreement, as well as this chapter.
   (E)   Time of the essence. Time shall be of the essence of any franchise.
The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply promptly with any
of the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement, by any failure of
the city to enforce prompt compliance.
   (F)   City right of transfer. Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon,
any officer, employee, department, or board of the city may be transferred at
any time by the city to any other officer, employee, department, or board of
the city.
   (G)   Legal compliance. The grantee shall comply with all federal, state,
city and local laws as now or hereafter enacted during the term of the
franchise. Copies of all petitions and applications concerning the franchise
submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities
and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or
agency having appropriate jurisdiction shall also be contemporaneously
submitted to the City Clerk.
   (H)   Pole attachments. Franchises granted under this chapter shall not
relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any
department of the city, utility company, or from others maintaining utility
poles.
   (I)   Private property. Except as otherwise provided by law, the granting of
a franchise shall not be construed as permission or authority to enter on,
occupy, or otherwise use any private property without the express consent of
the owner or agent in possession thereof.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.019 APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Procedures.Application for a franchise hereunder or any renewal
thereof shall be in writing accompanied by an application fee of $10,000, and
be filed with the city. Notice of intent to renew under the Cable Act shall not
be deemed to be an application for a renewal. The application fee shall be for
ordinary and reasonable costs which the city will incur in connection with the
preparation of an ordinance, related agreements or any renewal thereof. To the
extent allowed by law, such fee shall be within the exclusion to the term
“franchise fee” as defined in 47 USC 542(g)(2) and shall not be deemed to be
part of the franchise fee obligations of grantee pursuant to
§ 113.017(A) hereof. Application for a franchise hereunder shall contain, at
option of the city, the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a
partnership, the name and address of each partner shall also be set forth. If
the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also state the names and
addresses of its directors, executive officers, major stockholders, and the
names and addresses of parent and subsidiary companies.
      (2)   A statement and description of the cable system proposed to be
constructed, installed, maintained or operated by the applicant; the proposed
location of such system and its various components; the manner in which
applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the same; and
particularly, the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other
facilities of other public utilities will be used for such system.
      (3)   A description, in detail, of the streets, public places and
proposed public streets within which applicant proposes or seeks authority to
construct, install or maintain any cable equipment or facilities; a detailed
description of the equipment or facilities proposed to be constructed,
installed or maintained therein; and the proposed specific location thereof.
      (4)   A map specifically showing and delineating the existing and
proposed service area or areas within which applicant proposes to provide cable
services and for which a franchise is requested.
      (5)   A statement or schedule setting forth the number of channels and
all of the television or radio stations proposed to be received, transmitted,
conducted, relayed, or otherwise conveyed over the cable system.
      (6)   A statement or schedule in a form approved by the City Manager of
proposed rates and charges to subscribers for installation and services, and a
copy of the proposed subscription agreement between the grantee and its
subscribers shall accompany the application.
      (7)   A copy of any contract, if existing, between the applicant and any
public utility providing for the use of facilities of such public utility, such
as poles, lines, or conduits.
      (8)   A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings,
whether written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any
person, firm or corporation with respect to the proposed franchise or the
proposed cable operation. If a franchise is granted to a person, firm or
corporation posing as a front or as the representative of another person, firm
or corporation and such information is not disclosed in the original
application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect
whatsoever.
      (9)   A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant or
person otherwise satisfactory to the city, showing applicant's financial status
and his financial ability to complete the construction and installation of the
proposed cable system.
      (10)   The city may at any time demand and applicant shall provide such
supplementary, additional or other information as the city may deem reasonably
necessary to determine whether the requested franchise should be granted.
   (B)   Grant to applicant. Upon consideration of any such application, the
Council may refuse to grant the requested franchise or the Council may by
ordinance or resolution grant a franchise for a cable system to any such
applicant as may appear from the application to be in its opinion best
qualified to render proper and efficient cable service to television viewers
and subscribers in the city. The Council's decision in the matter shall be
final. If favorably considered, the application submitted shall constitute and
form part of the franchise as granted.
   (C)   Franchise agreement.
      (1)   Any franchise agreement granted pursuant to this chapter shall
include the following condition:
      “The cable system herein franchised shall be used and operated solely and
exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by ordinance of the City of
Riverbank and no other purpose whatsoever.”
      (2)   Inclusion of the foregoing statement in any such franchise shall
not be deemed to limit the authority of the city to include any other
reasonable condition, limitation or restriction which it may deem necessary to
impose in connection with such franchise pursuant to the authority conferred by
this chapter.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.020 ACCEPTANCE OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Filing. Within 30 days after the effective date of the franchise, or
within such extended period of time as the Council in its discretion may
authorize, the grantee shall file with the City Clerk: its agreement to be
bound by and to comply with and to perform all acts required of grantee by the
provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement; and documents
evidencing its compliance with the surety bond and insurance requirements, as
required in
§ 113.084 of this chapter.
   (B)   Condition subsequent to effectiveness of franchise. If grantee fails
to file the documents required in division (A) above in a timely manner, then
grantee's rights under the franchise agreement shall immediately terminate
until such time as grantee shall have complied with division (A) of this
section.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY
§ 113.030 EMINENT DOMAIN.
   Subject to state and federal law, nothing herein shall be deemed or
construed to impair or affect, in any way or to any extent, the right of the
city to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the
exercise of the right of eminent domain, at fair market value as provided by
law. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify
or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the city's right of eminent
domain.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.031 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.
   There is hereby reserved to the city every right and power which is required
to be herein reserved or provided by any ordinance of the city, and the
grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to
comply with any action or requirements of the city in its exercise of such
rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established, except as may
limit the grantee's contractual rights under this chapter and the franchise
agreement or grantee's constitutional rights.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.032 ADDITIONAL FRANCHISES.
   Neither the granting of any franchise hereunder nor any provisions contained
herein shall be construed to prevent the city from granting any identical or
similar franchise to any other person or entity within all or any portion of
the city.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.033 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The city may, from time to time, in the exercise of its police power, adopt
or issue such reasonable rules, regulations, orders or other directives
governing grantee under this chapter and require full and timely compliance on
the part of the grantee, provided such rules, regulations, orders and
directives are equally imposed on all persons operating cable systems in the
city, and are reasonably necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the
purposes of this chapter provided such rules, regulations, orders or directives
are not materially in conflict with the provisions of this chapter or the
franchise agreement.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.034 GOVERNMENTAL POWER.
   Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall
constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power
of the city.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.035 USE OF POLES.
   The city shall have the right, during the life of any franchise, to install
and maintain free of charge upon the poles of the grantee any wire and pole
fixtures necessary for police and fire alarm systems, on the condition that
such wire and pole fixtures do not interfere with the operations of grantee.
The city shall assume, indemnify, defend and hold grantee harmless from and
against all claims and liability for damages caused or occasioned by the
construction and maintenance of such police and fire alarm systems.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
PERMITS, INSTALLATION, DESIGN, AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 113.045 PERMITS AND AUTHORIZATIONS.
   Within 30 days after the effective date of any franchise, the grantee shall
proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations
which are required in the conduct of its business, including without
limitation, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier
licenses, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by
duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of
the cable system, or their associated microwave transmission facilities.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.046 SYSTEM DESIGN.
   The cable system shall be constructed in accordance with the design
requirements, if any, contained in the franchise agreement.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.047 GEOGRAPHICAL COVERAGE.
   The grantee shall design and construct the cable system and any additions
thereto in such a manner as to have the capability within a reasonably short
period of time to pass by every single dwelling unit, multiple dwelling unit,
business establishment, public school, hospital, library, law enforcement
station, fire station and all other buildings owned or controlled by the city
within the franchise territory. Such service shall be provided to subscribers
in accordance with the schedules in the franchise agreement and line extension
policies specified in
§ 113.051 herein. Cable system construction and provision of service shall be
non-discriminatory, and shall not delay or defer service to any section of the
franchise territory on grounds of economic preference of the grantee.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.048 SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Grantee shall comply with the requirements of the cable system
construction schedule, if any, contained in the franchise agreement and any
amendments thereto.
   (B)   Construction of the cable system and service need not be provided
where power and telephone utility services are not available.
   (C)   In the franchise agreement, grantee shall provide a detailed
construction plan indicating progress schedule, area construction maps, test
plan, and dates for offering service. In addition, as long as construction has
not been completed, grantee shall provide grantor an update of this information
for grantor on a monthly basis, showing specifically whether schedules are
being met and the reasons for any delay.
   (D)   Failure to begin construction within six months after award of the
franchise shall be grounds for immediate franchise termination, at the option
of grantor.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.049 UNDERGROUNDING.
   (A)   New development undergrounding. In cases of new construction or
property development where utilities are to be placed underground, upon request
by grantee, the developer or property owner shall give grantee reasonable
notice of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for
grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals, or vaults. Grantee shall also
timely provide specifications to the developer and property owner as needed for
trenching. Costs of trenching, installing conduit, and obtaining easements
required to bring service to any development shall be apportioned between
grantee, utility service providers, and the property owner as they may agree
among themselves. Developer shall, however, be primarily responsible for all
costs unless agreed otherwise.
   (B)   Undergrounding at multiple-dwelling units. In cases of utility
services delivered aerially to multiple dwelling units, grantee shall make
every effort to minimize the number of individual aerial drop cables, giving
preference to undergrounding of multiple drop cables between the pole and
dwelling unit.
   (C)   Additional undergrounding.  In those areas and portions of the city
where the transmission or distribution facilities of either the public utility
providing telephone service or those of the utility providing electric service
are already placed or to be placed underground at such utility's cost, subject
to division (A) above, the grantee shall likewise construct, operate and
maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground. For
the purposes of this subsection, “underground” shall include a partial
underground system, such as, streamlining. Amplifiers and other equipment in
grantee's transmission and distribution lines may be placed in appropriate
housings upon the surface of the ground if approved by the Director of Public
Works. The city shall not in any manner be responsible for any costs or
liabilities incurred by grantee in placing grantee's facilities underground or
obtaining any easements therefor.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.050 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The grantee shall extend cable service to any premises located in the
service area served by the grantee's energized distribution cable which
requires only the connection of a standard drop or tap to make such service
available, including those premises serviced by underground utilities, at a
standard rate if the owner or occupant of the premises requests such service.
   (B)   If the service connection requires no more than a 250-foot aerial drop
line, the grantee shall provide connection to its service at no charge for the
initial 250 feet, other than the grantee's standard installation fee. The
grantee may charge any new subscriber the maximum amount allowable by law for
that portion of any new aerial service connection in excess of 250 feet, the
length of any new service connections installed underground and the entire
length of any new service connection to remote or relatively inaccessible
subscribers. Prior to installing any service connection for which the grantee
will charge a potential subscriber on a time and material basis, the grantee
must present the prospective subscriber with a written statement of its
estimated costs for the service connection.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.051 LINE EXTENSIONS.
   The grantee shall be required to extend energized trunk cable from any
existing terminus of the cable system to any area within the franchise
territory having a density of at least ten existing and completed dwelling
units within any one-quarter linear mile, provided that the dwelling unit
nearest to the existing terminus of the cable system in such one-quarter linear
mile area is within one-half mile of the existing terminus of the cable system.
Within 30 days after grantee has confirmed the existence of the density
provided above, grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all
necessary permits and authorizations which are required for the extension of
such trunk cable, including any utility joint use agreements and any permits,
licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of the cable system. Within 30
days following completion of such line extension construction, the grantee
shall proceed to render service, provided, however, that any such subscriber
requesting service from the extension of the energized trunk cable shall be
subject to the provisions of §
113.050 herein with regard to costs of a tap or drop in excess of 250 feet.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
PROPERTY OF GRANTEE
§ 113.065 LOCATIONS TO BE APPROVED BY CITY.
   Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of the grantee
to be constructed or installed in streets, shall be so constructed or installed
only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the city.
Further, the grantee shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus in
or on other public property, places or right-of-way, or within any privately
owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is
designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative
subdivision map approved by the city, except those installed or erected upon
public utility facilities now existing without obtaining the prior written
approval of the city and the owner of any applicable privately owned property.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.066 INTERFERENCE.
   All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by
the grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum
interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and
places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners who join any of the streets, alleys or other
public ways and places. In the case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk,
alley, public way, or paved area, the grantee shall, at its own cost and
expense and in a manner approved by the Director of Public Works replace and
restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area in as good a
condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. Any such work
shall be completed as soon as is practicable.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.067 REMOVAL AND ABANDONMENT OF PROPERTY OF GRANTEE.
   (A)   Abandonment. If use of any part of the cable system is discontinued
for any reason for a period of 90 consecutive days or if such system or
property has been installed in any street or public place without complying
with the requirements of the franchise agreement or this chapter, or the
franchise has been terminated, cancelled or has expired, the grantee shall
promptly, upon being given 30 days' written notice from the city, remove from
the streets or public places all such property and poles of such cable system
or, at the option of the city, such property may be abandoned in place. Upon
removal of the system, the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other
area from which such property has been removed to a condition reasonably
satisfactory to the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   Property abandoned in place. Any property of the grantee to be
abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the city shall
prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the grantee in place,
the property shall become that of the city. The grantee shall submit to the
city an instrument in writing, to be approved by the City Attorney,
transferring to the city the ownership of such property.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.068 CHANGES REQUIRED BY PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   The grantee shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the
same street or other public place or remove from the street or other public
place, any property of the grantee when required by the city by reason of
traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway, and street
constructions change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers,
drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines and tracks or other type of
structures or improvements by public agencies at the expense of grantee.
However, the grantee shall in all such cases have the privileges and be subject
to the obligations to abandon any property of the grantee in place, as provided
in
§ 113.067 above.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
LIABILITY, INDEMNIFICATION, AND TERMINATION
§ 113.080 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The grantee shall indemnify and save harmless and defend the city, its
officers and employees from and against any and all injury, loss, damage,
costs, expenses, claims, attorneys' fees, demands, actions, suits, judgments,
or other proceedings, or liability, including but not limited to any liability
for inverse condemnation or for failure to secure consents for programs
delivered by the grantee's system, arising out of or in any way connected with
the grant, exercise or enjoyment of grantee's franchise. These damages or
penalties shall include, without limitation, damages arising out of copyright
infringements and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation,
or maintenance of the cable system, whether or not any act or omission
complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by the franchise.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.081 DEFENSE COSTS.
   The grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of a franchise specifically
agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself
under
§ 113.080 above. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, such
as reasonable attorney fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any
services rendered by the City Attorney or his assistants or any employees of
the city.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.082 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Insurance. The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of a
franchise specifically agrees that it currently possesses and will maintain
throughout the term of the franchise a general comprehensive liability
insurance policy in protection of the city, its officers, boards, commissions,
agents and employees, in a company approved by the city and in a form
satisfactory to the city naming the city, its officers, boards, commissions,
agents, and employees as additional insureds and protecting the city and all
persons against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death, or
property damage, occasioned by the operations of grantee under this franchise,
in the amounts of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to any one person, with
the limit, however, of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death resulting from any
one accident; $1,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one occurrence;
and $1,000,000 for Workers Compensation and Employer's Liability.
   (B)   Insurance policy.
      (1)   The insurance policy mentioned in division (A) above shall contain
an endorsement stating that the policy is extended to cover the liability
assumed by the grantee under the terms of the franchise, and shall contain an
endorsement as follows:
   “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be cancelled
nor the amount of any coverage thereof reduced until 60 days after receipt by
the City Clerk of the City of Riverbank, City Hall, Riverbank, California, by
registered mail, of a written notice of such proposed cancellation or reduction
in coverage.”
      (2)   Additionally, grantee agrees to comply with all reasonable
insurance requirements imposed by the city and agrees that the amount of the
insurance required hereunder may be reasonably amended not more often that
every three years by the city to take account of inflation and considerations
of risk and potential liability.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.083 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   (A)   No later than the effective date of any franchise granted hereunder,
the grantee shall establish and provide to the city a corporate surety bond
(the “surety bond”) in a form reasonably acceptable to the city and its counsel
in the sum of $15,000 as security for the faithful performance by the grantee
of specified provisions of the franchise agreement. The surety bond shall
remain at this level throughout the term of the franchise. The surety bond may
be assessed by the city, following 14 days' prior written notice and hearing,
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Payment of franchise fees which the grantee has failed to pay to
the city for any franchise hereunder;
      (2)   Reimbursement of proper costs borne by the city to correct
franchise violations not corrected by the grantee, provided that the city has
first provided grantee with written notice of such violation and grantee has
not either cured such violation or given the city notice that it disputes that
such violation has occurred within a reasonable time after grantee has received
the city's notice of violation;
      (3)   Payment of liquidated damages assessed against the grantee due to
default or violation of the franchise requirements;
      (4)   Compensation and costs of completing or repairing the system as
provided in the franchise agreement;
      (5)   Compensation and costs of removal of any abandoned property;
      (6)   Repair of damage to streets caused by grantee or any officer,
agent, employee, contractor or subcontractor retained by grantee;
      (7)   Other public or private improvements made necessary as a result of
the failure of grantee to comply with any provisions of any franchise agreement
granted hereunder. Within 30 calendar days after notice is mailed to the
grantee that any amount has been paid to the city by the surety bond pursuant
to this section, the grantee shall restore the surety bond to its original
level.
   (B)   If the surety bond is assessed in accordance with this section and the
terms of the surety bond, grantee agrees not to withhold these funds from the
city or refuse to restore the surety bond if required by this section, nor to
attempt through litigation to prevent or inhibit the city from taking such
funds. If grantee has been given the required notice and opportunity to be
heard, then grantee's recourse, in the event grantee believes any taking of
funds from the surety bond is improper, shall be through legal action, after
the surety bond has been drawn upon.
   (C)   If the city's action or taking is found to be improper by any court or
agency of competent jurisdiction, grantee shall be entitled to a refund of the
funds taken, plus interest thereon and/or any other award which such court or
agency shall make.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.084 EVIDENCE.
   A copy of the surety bond, and a certificate of insurance evidencing the
insurance policies described in §
113.082(A) above and written evidence of payment of required premiums, shall be
filed and maintained with the City Clerk during the term of the franchise.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.085 NO EXCUSE.
   Neither the provisions of this chapter, nor any bond accepted by the city
pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the city thereunder, shall be
construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability
of the grantee under any franchise agreement hereunder or for damages, either
to the full amount of the surety bond or otherwise.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.086 SANCTIONS.
   Subject to the provisions of this chapter and any franchise agreement
granted hereunder, the city shall be empowered, following 14 days' prior
written notice to grantee, hearing and reasonable opportunity to cure, to
impose the following sanctions:
   (A)   The termination of a franchise in whole or in part as provided in
§ 113.088.
   (B)   For failure by the grantee to complete the system, build or rebuild
expanding channel capacity to the required capacity by the date set forth in
the franchise agreement, the grantee shall pay not more than $250 per day for
each day the deficiency continues.
   (C)   For failure of the grantee to provide extension of service in
accordance with the franchise agreement unless the city specifically approves a
delay due to the occurrence of conditions beyond grantee's control, grantee
shall pay to the city not more than $150 per day for each day the deficiency
continues.
   (D)   For failure by the grantee to provide the city with a copy of the
financial statement required by
§ 113.017, a copy of the surety bond required by
§ 113.083, a copy of the certificate of insurance required by
§ 113.082, complaint logs, maps, and permits, grantee shall pay to the city not
more than $25 per day for each day that such violation continues.
   (E)   For failure by the grantee to comply with quality of service or
operation or technical standards following the city's written notice directing
grantee to make improvements, grantee shall pay to the city not more than $50
per day for each day the violation continues.
   (F)   For failure by grantee to test, analyze, and report on the performance
of the system following a request by the city pursuant to
§ 113.100(B) below, grantee shall pay to the city not more than $20 for each
day that such noncompliance continues.
   (G)   Each of the sanctions above shall commence, if at all, on the day
after the city has satisfied the procedural requirements of this section.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.087 CREDITS TO SUBSCRIBERS; DETERMINATION OF RIGHT TO CREDIT.
   (A)   Credits to subscribers. Except as may be otherwise provided in any
franchise agreement and except for acts beyond the reasonable control of
grantee or where prior approval has been obtained from the city, in the event
that service to any subscriber or user in interrupted (and provided a claim
therefor shall have been made to grantee's local office within 30 days of a
subscriber's receipt of a service bill), a grantee shall credit a percentage of
the monthly fee to affected subscribers or users as follows:
      (1)   Twenty-four consecutive hours: 5% rebate of the monthly fee;
      (2)   Twenty-four to 48 consecutive hours: 15% rebate of the monthly fee;
and
      (3)   Forty-eight to 72 consecutive hours: 25% rebate of the monthly fee.
   (B)   Determination of right to credit. After 14 days' prior written notice
to grantee and opportunity to be heard, the city shall be empowered to
determine whether the subscriber is entitled to a credit in all cases where the
grantee denies such. If the city determines that a subscriber is entitled to a
credit, it shall notify grantee in writing (by delivery to grantee's local
office or by regular mail, neither certified nor registered) of the name of the
subscriber, the amount of the credit and the reason therefor. A copy thereof
shall be sent to the subscriber.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.088 TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE FOR CAUSE; PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Termination of franchise for cause. In addition to all other rights
and powers of the city, the city reserves the right to terminate any franchise
granted hereunder and all rights and privileges of a franchise hereunder in the
event that any grantee:
      (1)   Violates any material provisions of this chapter or any rule,
order, or determination of the city made pursuant hereto, provided however, a
sanction for such violation has been finally imposed on at least one prior
occasion within one year of final determination of the sanction and provided,
further, that the city has found that the violation is material to this chapter
or the franchise agreement awarded pursuant to this chapter;
      (2)   Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is
adjudged a bankrupt or is subject to the appointment of a receiver;
      (3)   Fails to begin or complete system construction or extension as
provided in this chapter or a franchise granted thereunder; or
      (4)   Misrepresents any material fact in any reports required to be filed
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Termination procedures. No such termination shall take place unless
and until the following procedures have been followed:
      (1)   The city shall provide grantee with written notice of the violation
by certified mail. The notice shall specify the basis for the city's
determination and shall specify the immediate action required of grantee to
correct the material violation.
      (2)   If the violation continues for a period of 45 days following
written notification from the city, the city may place a request for
termination of the franchise on a regularly scheduled City Council meeting
agenda. The city shall cause to be served upon the grantee by certified mail at
least 14 days prior to the day of such City Council meeting, a written notice
of the intent to request such a termination and the time and place of the
meeting.
      (3)   After providing franchisee with notice and opportunity to be heard
and in the event the city determines that grantee, by its acts or omissions,
has given the city cause for termination of the franchise, the city may make
written demand upon grantee for full compliance. If the material violation is
not cured to the reasonable satisfaction of the city within 30 days or such
additional time as the city may allow, the city may after written notice to
grantee and final opportunity to be heard (in the exercise of its reasonable
discretion) declare the franchise terminated and of no further force or effect.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.089 RESTORATION OF PROPERTY.
   In the event that the city requires grantee to dismantle the system, grantee
shall, in an expeditious manner, at its own expense and at the direction of the
city, restore any property, public or private, to substantially the same
condition in which it existed prior to the erection or construction of the
system, including any improvements made to such property subsequent to the
construction of the system.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
INSPECTIONS AND EVALUATION
§ 113.100 INSPECTION OF PROPERTY AND RECORDS.
   (A)   Inspection. Upon written request made seven days in advance, during
normal business hours, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized
representative of the city to examine the cable system of the grantee, together
with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or without the
city and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or
maintained by the grantee or under its control which pertain to the operation
of the cable system. If any such maps or records are not kept in the city, or
upon reasonable request are not made available in the city, and if the Council
shall determine that an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate then
all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such
examination shall be paid by the grantee.
   (B)   Reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the city at the
times and in the form prescribed by the city such reports with respect to its
operation, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or
appropriate concerning both the cost to grantee and the value to the city to
the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city or any of
its officers in connection with the franchise. The costs of furnishing such
reports shall be borne by the grantee up to a maximum of $2,000 per year.
   (C)   Location of equipment. The grantee shall at all times make and keep in
the city full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all
cable system equipment installed or in use in streets and other public places
in the city. The grantee shall file with the city on or before the first
anniversary date of the franchise grant or renewal, as the case may be, a
current map or set of maps drawn to scale, showing all cable system equipment
installed and in place in streets and other public places of the city.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.101 OPERATIONAL STANDARDS, EVALUATION SESSIONS.
   (A)   The cable system shall meet all technical and performance standards
contained in the franchise agreement. If requested by either party not later
than the anniversary dates stated below, within 120 calendar days following the
fifth and (in the case of a franchise term extending for more than ten years)
tenth years' anniversary dates of the effective date of the franchise, the
grantee and the city shall conduct evaluation sessions for the purpose of
evaluating the grantee's performance in meeting the technical and performance
standards as set forth in this chapter and the franchise agreement and for the
purpose of evaluating the efficiency and effectiveness of the system to meet
community needs and consumer demand.
   (B)   The evaluation sessions shall be conducted during public hearings held
by the city. Any and all technical and performance requirements of this chapter
and the franchise agreement may be reviewed and performance evaluated, and all
sections in this chapter that are subject to revision so long as in accordance
with state and federal law, as may be amended from time to time. Topics
discussed at such sessions may include, but shall not be limited to, service
rate structures, completion of the system, formulae used in system extension,
application of new technologies, system technical performance, maintenance
procedures, services provided, plans to upgrade the system, new services or
additional transmission capacity, broad categories of programming, privacy,
customer complaints and informal dispute settlement procedures, customer
service rules and penalty schedule, illegal connections, office and field
service, community programming facilities and services, public and educational
access facilities and programming, municipal and school building connections,
interconnection, emergency override, affirmative action training and employment
and enterprise programs, grantee or city rules and regulations; and shall
include any topic relating to technical and performance requirements of the
ordinance and franchise agreement which the grantee, city or members of the
public request to be discussed.
   (C)   Should the state or any agency thereof, the United States or any
federal agency thereof, or any state or federal court legally allow either the
city or the grantee to act in a manner which is inconsistent with any
provisions of the ordinance or franchise agreement granted hereunder, the city
and the grantee shall each be authorized to determine whether a material
provision of the franchise agreement or ordinance is affected in relation to
the rights of benefits conferred by the franchise agreement and ordinance. Upon
such determination, the city and the grantee shall negotiate in good faith to
modify or amend the ordinance and franchise agreement to such extent as may be
necessary to carry out the full intent and purposes of the change in law in
relation to the rights and benefits of the grantee, the city of the public.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
MINIMUM CONSUMER PROTECTION AND SERVICE STANDARDS
§ 113.115 CUSTOMER SERVICE.
   Grantee shall provide the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to
comply with the following consumer protection and standards under normal
conditions of operation:
   (A)   Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business
hours to assure that a minimum of 95% of all calls will be answered before the
fourth ring.
   (B)   Emergency toll-free telephone capacity on a 24-hour basis, including
weekends and holidays.
   (C)   An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of
responding to and repairing major system malfunction on a 24-hour per day
basis.
   (D)   An installation staff, capable of installing service to any subscriber
within seven days after receipt of request, in all areas where trunk and feeder
cable have been activated.
   (E)   Grantee shall schedule, within a specified four-hour time period, all
appointments with subscribers for installation or service.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.116 EFFICIENT SERVICE.
   (A)   Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and
shall occur during a period of minimum use of the system, preferably between
midnight and 6:00 a.m. Grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians
generally capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the
following time frames:
      (1)   For a system outage: Within two hours, including weekends, of
receiving subscriber calls or request for service which by number identify a
system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting at least
10% of the subscribers of the system.
      (2)   For an isolated outage: Within 24 hours, including weekends of
receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or
picture for one or more channels.
      (3)   For inferior signal quality: Within 48 hours, including weekends,
of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or
sound quality.
   (B)   Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service
under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives at the service
location and begins works on the problem. In the case of a subscriber not being
home when the technician arrives, the technician shall leave written
notification of arrival. Three successive subscriber failures to be present at
an appointed time shall excuse grantee of duty to respond.
   (C)   No charge shall be made to the subscriber for any service call unless
the service request can be demonstrated to be unrelated to the cable system or
to involve subscriber negligence, or damage to grantee's property by the
subscriber.
   (D)   Unless excused, grantee shall determine the nature of the problem
within 48 hours of beginning work and resolve all cable system related problems
within five business days unless technically unfeasible.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.117 SERVICE LOG.
   Grantee shall maintain a written log, or an equivalent stored in computer
memory and capable of access and reproduction in printed form, for all service
interruptions and requests for cable service that result in a service call.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.118 SERVICE CALL NOTICE.
   Grantee shall notify subscribers of the expected time of any service visit.
At a minimum such notification shall indicate the four-hour period within which
the visit will occur. To the extent practicable subscriber preferences for the
scheduling of service visits shall be honored.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.119 SUBSCRIBER COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon,
and resolving subscriber complaints without the intervention by grantor. The
written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit
a complaint either orally or in writing specifying the subscriber's grounds for
dissatisfaction. Grantee shall file a copy of these procedures with grantor.
      (1)   Grantor may determine, upon review of a subscriber complaint and
the grantee's decision, if any, whether further action is warranted.
      (2)   The grantor may establish an escrow account wherein a subscriber
may deposit a disputed portion of the subscriber's monthly service charge. If a
subscriber either continues to make full and timely payment of all monthly
service charges to grantee or deposit any disputed portion of such monthly
service charges into the escrow account, grantee shall not discontinue service
during the pendency of complaint submitted under the provisions of this
chapter. Any amount deposited in the escrow account shall be paid to the
grantee or subscriber in accordance with a final determination of a complaint.
      (3)   It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving
service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are
honored. In the event that the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the
system, or the grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the
franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive
service so long as the franchise remains in force.
   (B)   Grantee shall furnish to subscribers at the time of the initial
subscription and not less than every year thereafter a notice of such
procedures.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.120 COMPLIANCE WITH CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Upon five days notice, grantee shall establish its compliance with any
or all of the standards required above. Grantee shall provide sufficient
documentation to permit grantor to verify the compliance.
   (B)   A repeated and verifiable pattern of material non-compliance with the
consumer protection standards, after grantee's receipt of due notice and an
opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise
agreement.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.121 IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   All officers, agents, or employees of the grantee or its contractors or
subcontractors who in the normal course of work require entry onto subscribers'
premises shall carry a photo-identification card in a form approved by grantor.
Grantor shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle
of the grantee utilized for field maintenance shall be clearly identified as
working for grantee. All such identification shall be returned on termination
of service or permanently defaced on sale of vehicle.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.122 CONTINUED OPERATION OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   In the event of a change of grantee, or in the event a new operator
acquires the system, the original grantee shall cooperate with the grantor, new
grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers.
During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period
during which it operates the system.
   (B)   In the event grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive
days without prior approval or subsequent excusal of the grantor, the grantor
may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time
as grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the grantor or a
permanent operator is selected. If the grantor should fulfill this obligation
for the grantee, then during such period as the grantor fulfills such
obligation, the grantor shall be entitled to collect all revenues from the
system, and the grantee shall reimburse the grantor for all reasonable costs or
damages in excess of the revenues collected by the grantor that are the result
of the grantee's failure to perform.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.135 WORK TO BE DONE BY CITY UPON FAILURE OF GRANTEE.
   Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue, or complete, within the
time prescribed, any work required by law, by this chapter or by the franchise
agreement, to be done in any street or other public place, the city may, at its
option, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the city one
and one-half times the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the
Director of Public Works to the grantee within 30 days after receipt of such
itemized report.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.136 CITY CLERK.
   When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be
filed with the city shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.137 SERVICE TO PUBLIC FACILITIES/PEG.
   With the city's reasonable cooperation, grantee shall, without charge,
within 180 days of the grant of the franchise hereunder fully wire with one
outlet for existing buildings and up to three outlets for each 1,000 square
feet of any newly constructed buildings and to provide all legally and
contractually allowable subscriber services of its system to all public and
nonprofit private schools, city police and fire stations, city recreation
centers, City Hall, and such other buildings owned or controlled by the city,
which shall from time to time be designated by the city, provided that such
buildings shall be located within the franchise territory. Additionally,
grantee shall as a condition of any grant of a franchise hereunder provide a
variety of facilities, channel(s) on the system, and equipment for public,
educational and governmental (“PEG”) purposes as detailed in the franchise
agreement.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.138 EMERGENCY SERVICE.
   In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall upon request of
the City Manager, make available its facilities to the city for emergency use
during the emergency or disaster period. The grantee shall upon the city's
request provide advance orientation and guidance regarding the use of its
facilities in an emergency or disaster.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.139 LIMITATIONS.
   The grantee shall not engage directly or indirectly in the business of
selling, leasing, renting, furnishing, providing, repairing or servicing any
television, radio or other receiving apparatus or any component part thereof
within the city (except those used in connection with the operation of the
cable system); and such prohibition shall extend and apply to officers and
directors of grantee, to all general and limited partners of grantee, to any
person or combination of persons owning, holding or controlling 5% or more of
any corporate stock or other ownership interest of grantee, or any affiliated
or subsidiary entity, owned or controlled by grantee, or in which any officer,
director, stockholder, general or limited partner, or person or group of
persons holding, or controlling any ownership interest in grantee, shall own,
hold or control 5% or more of any corporate stock or other ownership interest;
and such prohibition shall likewise apply to any person, firm or corporation
acting or serving in the capacity of a holding or controlled company.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.140 REFUSAL OF SERVICE.
   Subject to the line extension provisions in the franchise agreement, no
person, firm or corporation in the franchise territory shall be arbitrarily
refused service, provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to
provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection
fee or monthly service charge, or who does not pay at the time of request for
service any amount legally owed to grantee for connection or monthly service.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.141 SUBSCRIPTION AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Before grantee shall provide service to any subscriber, grantee shall
obtain a signed contract from the subscriber containing a provision
substantially as follows:
   “Subscriber understands that in providing service grantee is making use of
public rights-of-way within the City of Riverbank and that the continued use of
these public rights-of-way is in no way guaranteed. If the continued use of
such rights-of-way is denied to grantee for any reason, grantee will make every
reasonable effort to provide service over alternative routes. Subscriber agrees
he/she will make no claim nor undertake any action against the city, its
officers, its employees, or grantee if a service to be provided by grantee
hereunder is interrupted or discontinued because the continued use of such
rights-of-way is denied to grantee for any reason.”
   (B)   The form of grantee's contract with its subscribers shall be subject
to approval of the city with respect to the inclusion of this provision.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.142 RIGHT OF GRANTEE.
   Should grantee become dissatisfied with any material decision or ruling of
the city pertaining to any matter in this chapter, the franchise agreement or
other cable communications matters, grantee may pursue such other remedies as
are available, including the bringing of action in any court of competent
jurisdiction for breach of contract and damages.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.143 USE OF UTILITY POLES AND FACILITIES.
   When any portion of the cable system is to be installed on public utility
poles and facilities, certified copies of the agreements for such joint use of
poles and facilities shall be filed with the City Clerk. Existing utility poles
shall be used wherever possible.7
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
VIOLATIONS
§ 113.155 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person:
   (A)   To establish, operate or to carry on the business of distributing to
any persons in this city any television signals or radio signals by means of a
cable system; or
   (B)   To construct, install or maintain within any street in the city, or
within any other public property of the city, or within any privately owned
area within the city which has not become a public street but is designated or
delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map
approved by the city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any
television signals or radio signals through a cable system, unless a franchise
therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and
unless such franchise is in full force and effect.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.156 PIRATING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to make any unauthorized
connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or
otherwise, with any part of a franchise cable system within this city for the
purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio signals, pictures,
programs or sound, or enabling him/herself or others to receive any television
signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner
of the system.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.157 TAMPERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to
willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for
distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or
sounds.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
§ 113.158 PENALTIES.
   Any person willfully violating any of the provisions of §§
113.155 through
113.157 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to the penalties and relief provided in 47 USC 553(b) and (c).
(Ord. 94-09, passed 9-12-94)
CHAPTER 114: FORTUNE-TELLING
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Permit, compliance with conditions required
   
114.03   Permit application
   
114.04   Investigation
   
114.05   Hearing and decision by City Manager
   
114.06   Issuance of permit
   
114.07   Permit revocation
   
114.08   Exceptions
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOR PAY. For a fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value.
   FORTUNE-TELLING. Telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures, or furnishing
of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of
knowledge, by means of any occult, psychic power, faculty, force, clairvoyance,
clairaudience, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, tea
leaves or other such reading, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury,
astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind-reading, telepathy, or other craft art,
science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or
substance, gypsy cunning or foresight, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries or
magic, of any kind or nature.
(`67 Code, § 6-10-1)
§ 114.02 PERMIT, COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no person shall
conduct, engage in, carry on, participate in, or practice fortune-telling or
cause the same to be done for pay without having first obtained a permit from
the City Manager and without having posted and maintained in full force and
effect a surety bond as required in
§§ 114.06.
   (B)   No person shall violate any of the terms and conditions of a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter, nor any of the regulations and provisions
within this chapter. Each day such a violation or violations occur shall
constitute a separate violation.
(`67 Code, § 6-10-2)
§ 114.03 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every natural person who, for pay, actively conducts, engages in,
carries on, or practices fortune-telling shall file a separate verified
application for a permit with the City Manager.
   (B)   The application shall contain:
      (1)   The name, home and business address, and home and business phone
number of the applicant.
      (2)   The record of conviction for violations of the law, excluding minor
traffic violations.
      (3)   The fingerprints of the applicant on a form provided by the
Riverbank Police Services Division.
      (4)   The address, city and state, and the approximate dates where and
when the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction
with others.
      (5)   An application fee of $100.
(`67 Code, § 6-10-3)
§ 114.04 INVESTIGATION.
   Upon the filing of the application, it shall be referred by the City Manager
to the Riverbank Police Services Division for investigation, report and
recommendation. The investigation shall be conducted to verify the facts
contained in the application and any supporting data. The investigation shall
be completed and a report and recommendation made in writing to the City
Manager within 14 days after the filing of the application, unless the
applicant requests or consents to an extension of the time period. If the
report recommends denial of the permit to the applicant, the grounds for the
recommended denial shall be set forth. At the time of filing of the report and
recommendation with the City Manager, a copy thereof shall be served personally
or by certified mail by the City Manager on the applicant, accompanied by a
notice to the applicant may request to be heard when the City Manager considers
the application and report.
(`67 Code, § 6-10-4)
§ 114.05 HEARING AND DECISION BY CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   The City Manager shall consider the application and report and
recommendation at a hearing held by him on or before the seventh day after the
filing of the report and recommendation referred to in
§ 114.04.
   (B)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to all
parties by the City Manager at least three days prior to the hearing.
   (C)   Any interested party shall be heard upon a reasonable request.
   (D)   The city shall have the burden of proof to show the permit should be
denied.
   (E)   The decision of the City Manager to grant or deny the permit shall be
in writing, and if adverse to the applicant, shall contain findings of fact and
a determination of the issues presented.
   (F)   Unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of time, the
City Manager shall make his order denying or granting the application within 24
hours after completion of the hearing on the application for a permit and shall
notify the applicant of his action by personal service or certified mail.
(`67 Code, § 6-10-5)
§ 114.06 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The City Manager shall approve the issuance of the permit if he finds:
      (1)   All the information contained in the application and supporting
data is true.
      (2)   The applicant has not, within the previous six months, been
convicted of any violation of this chapter or any law relating to fraud or
moral turpitude.
      (3)   The applicant appeared in person at the hearing.
      (4)   The applicant agrees to abide by and comply with all conditions of
the permit and this chapter.
   (B)   The City Manager shall deny the permit only if it cannot make each of
the findings set forth above.
   (C)   If the City Manager approves the permit, the City Treasurer shall
thereafter issue the permit when:
      (1)   The fee required by
§ 110.18 has been paid.
      (2)   The applicant has posted with the City Clerk, surety bond in the
principal sum amount of $10,000 executed as surety by a good and sufficient
corporate surety authorized to do a surety business in the state and as a
principal by the applicant. The form of the bond shall have been approved by
the City Attorney and shall have been given to insure good-faith and fair
dealing on the part of the applicant and as a guarantee of indemnity for any
and all loss, damage, theft, or other unfair dealings suffered by any patron of
the applicant within the city during the term of the permit.
   (D)   The term of the permit shall be for one year. A renewal application
shall be filed no later than 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit and
shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.
(`67 Code, § 6-10-6)
§ 114.07 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   Upon the discovery of any false or misleading statement in the application
or any misrepresentation by the applicant in procuring the permit or upon the
termination of the bond required hereunder or upon the applicant's violation of
any provision of this chapter, the City Manager may conduct a hearing upon five
days' written notice to the applicant to determine whether the permit should be
revoked.
(`67 Code, § 6-10-7)
§ 114.08 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person solely by
reason of the fact that he or she is engaged in the business of entertaining
the public by demonstrations of mind reading, mental telepathy, thought
conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings, at public places and in the
presence of and within the hearing of other persons and at which no questions
are answered, as part of such entertainment, except in a manner to permit all
persons present at such public place to hear such answers.
   (B)   No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any permit for
conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when such
person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium,
healer, or clairvoyant, hereafter collectively referred to as minister, from
any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding
regular services and having a creed or set of religious principles that is
recognized by all churches of like faith, provided that:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (3) below, the fees, gratuities,
emoluments, and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid
solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or religious association,
as defined in this division (B).
      (2)   The minister holding a certificate of ordination from such bona
fide church or religious association, as defined in this division (B), shall
file with the City Manager a certified copy of the minister's certificate of
ordination with the minister's name, age, street address, and phone number in
this city where the activity set forth in this division (B) is to be conducted.
      (3)   Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this
division (B), may pay to its ministers a salary or compensation based upon the
percentage basis, pursuant to an agreement between the church and the minister
which is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of such church
or religious association.
(`67 Code, § 6-10-8) (Ord. 85-15, passed 10-28-85)
CHAPTER 115: PUBLIC DANCES
Section
   
115.01   Definition
   
115.02   Permit required
   
115.03   Issuance of permit
   
115.04   License required
   
115.05   Waiver of fees
   
115.06   Rules and regulations of operation
§ 115.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance to which the public generally may gain admittance
with or without the payment of a fee.
(`67 Code, § 7-9-1)
§ 115.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to open, conduct or carry on, or to
participate in the opening, conducting or carrying on, of a public dance or
public dance hall in the city unless there exists a valid permit.
(`67 Code, § 7-9-2)
§ 115.03 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   Upon receipt of an application for a permit by the Clerk, a permit shall be
issued if the applicant is in good standing. A permit shall be required for
each dance, provided, however, that upon proper application and payment of the
required fees and costs, the Clerk may issue a permit to cover all dances to be
held by the applicant within a period of one year. The first yearly permit
issued to any applicant may be reviewed within six months from the date of its
issuance, at which time a public hearing shall be held after proper notice and
the Council may, at the conclusion of the hearing, revoke the permit if they
find that the conducting or carrying on of the public dances has been
detrimental to the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
city. Each application must be made not less than five days prior to the date
fixed for the dance.
(`67 Code, § 7-9-4)
§ 115.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   In addition to the permit fees and costs required under the terms of this
chapter, each applicant shall obtain and maintain a license pursuant to the
provisions of
Chapter 110 of this Code.
(`67 Code, § 7-9-5)
§ 115.05 WAIVER OF FEES.
   The Council, upon proper application, may waive any and all permit fees and
license fees for dances held by bona fide memorial, fraternal, charitable, or
nonprofit organizations and associations which shall otherwise be subject to
all the provisions of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 7-9-6) (Ord. 92-02, passed 3-9-92)
§ 115.06 RULES AND REGULATIONS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful to open, conduct, or carry on a public dance or to
dance in a public dance hall in violation of the following rules and
regulations:
   (A)   No public dance shall be held or conducted unless a valid, unrevoked
permit therefor is in full force and effect with all fees and costs prepaid as
set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Every person obtaining a permit under the provisions of this chapter
shall place such permit in a conspicuous place in the place or places named in
such permit and shall show such permit whenever required to do so by any police
officer of the city.
   (C)   No public dancing shall be permitted between the hours of 2:01 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. of the same day.
(`67 Code, § 7-9-3)
CHAPTER 116: TAXICABS
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Permit and application; fee
   
116.03   Public convenience and necessity
   
116.04   Liability insurance
   
116.05   Written permission required for vehicle stand
   
116.06   Drivers' permit
   
116.07   Rules and regulations of Council; authority of Sheriff's Commanding
Officer
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVER or CHAUFFEUR. Every person in charge of or operating any passenger-
carrying vehicles as herein defined, either as agent, employee, or otherwise,
under the direction of the owner, as herein defined.
   OWNER. Every person having use or control of, or right to use or control any
passenger-carrying automobile.
(`67 Code, § 3-10-1)
§ 116.02 PERMIT AND APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   No owner shall conduct or engage in the business of operating any of
the vehicles defined in §
116.01 without having first obtained a permit from the city pursuant to this
chapter. In addition to the requirements specified in or imposed under this
chapter, each application for any such permit shall state the name and
residence address of each and every person interested in the ownership,
operation or control of any vehicles for which such permit is desired, together
with the number of each such vehicle, the make thereof, its capacity and the
address of the place of business of such applicant. The application shall
contain the name, color scheme, insignia or other design to be used upon such
vehicle. Also, the application shall set forth the schedule of rates.
(`67 Code, § 3-10-2)
   (B)   The permits herein mentioned shall entitle the holder thereof to
obtain a license to engage in the business described in the permit from the
City Clerk upon payment in advance of the $50 and the license fee prescribed in
Chapter 110 of this Code and the City Clerk shall issue to the holder of such
permit a license setting forth the kind of transportation for which such
license is issued and the period for which the same shall be effective.
(`67 Code, § 3-10-5)
§ 116.03 PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY.
   No permit shall be granted to any person to engage in the business of
operating any of the above mentioned vehicles, until it has been shown that
public convenience and necessity require the operation of such vehicles.
(`67 Code, § 3-10-4)
§ 116.04 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The application shall show that the owner has procured and paid in advance
the annual premium upon an insurance policy with an accredited and recognized
insurance company doing business in the state, whereby the owner and the driver
of each of the taxicabs which the owner will operate in the city are insured
against liability for injury to any person as the result of the ownership,
operation, or use thereof; the minimum liability limits upon each taxicab shall
be in an amount to be determined by the City Manager for personal injury to any
one person, persons, or for the injury to or destruction of property.
(`67 Code, § 3-10-3)
§ 116.05 WRITTEN PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR VEHICLE STAND.
   No person granted a permit as provided herein shall maintain a stand for any
vehicle for which a permit is issued upon any street, without the permittee
having first obtained in writing permission from the Council, and the owner or
lessee or other person in charge of the property in the front of which such
stand is maintained.
(`67 Code, § 3-10-6)
§ 116.06 DRIVERS' PERMIT.
   No person shall drive, operate or be in charge of any taxicab or automobile
for hire without first having obtained a permit, in writing, so to do, from the
Sheriff's Commanding Officer. Before any permit is granted the applicant
therefor shall file with the Sheriff's Commanding Officer an application in
writing, stating therein the name and address of such applicant, his experience
in the operation of an automobile, his age and as to whether he has any
physical defects, and, if so, the nature of the same and shall exhibit any
operator's or chauffeur's license issued to him by the state.
(`67 Code, § 3-10-7)
§ 116.07 RULES AND REGULATIONS OF COUNCIL; AUTHORITY OF SHERIFF'S COMMANDING
OFFICER.
   (A)   All chauffeurs and owners of automobiles for hire as defined by this
chapter shall be governed by rules and regulations established by the City
Council.
(`67 Code, § 3-10-9) (Ord. 70-7, passed 5-25-70)
   (B)   The Sheriff's Commanding Officer shall have power to grant the permits
mentioned in
§ 116.06 to persons who have complied with the provisions of this chapter and
any rules and regulations adopted by the Council, and he shall also have the
power to suspend or revoke any permit for failure, neglect, or refusal of any
such person to comply with this chapter, or any rule or regulation of the
Council appertaining to the operation of motor vehicles.
(`67 Code, § 3-10-8)
CHAPTER 117: SECONDHAND DEALERS
Section
   
117.01   Definition
   
117.02   Compliance with regulations required
   
117.03   Violation declared public nuisance
§ 117.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SECONDHAND DEALER. Every person who engages in, or conducts the business of
buying, selling, or exchanging used furniture, household furnishings, books,
merchandise, or any other secondhand articles or things, including secondhand
automobiles, wrecked automobiles and junk. The term “secondhand dealer” shall
not include any person who buys, sells, or exchanges used cars which are in
operable condition without major body damage, nor shall it include used or
secondhand merchandise offered for sale by vendors at special community events.
(`67 Code, § 6-6-1) (Ord. 83-4, passed 5-23-83)
§ 117.02 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a
secondhand dealer as defined in this chapter, unless such business is carried
on, maintained, or conducted in compliance with the regulations in division
(B).
   (B)   Such business carried on, maintained, and conducted must occur within
authorized zone districts as established by
Chapter 153 of this code, and such activites must comply with standards and
criteria as may be adopted from time to time by the city.
(`67 Code, § 6-6-2) (Am. Ord. 98-02, passed 7-13-98)
§ 117.03 VIOLATION DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Any secondhand business which is established, conducted, operated or
maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is
hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Attorney shall
upon the order of the Council immediately commence action or proceedings for
the abatement and removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law
and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have
jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove and enjoin the
conduct of such business contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 6-6-4) (Ord. 246, passed 10-26-59)
CHAPTER 118: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
118.01   Legislative purpose
   
118.02   Definitions
   
118.03   Permits required
Applications and Permits
   
118.04   Adult entertainment business regulatory permit required
   
118.05   Applications
   
118.06   Investigation and action on application for adult entertainment
business regulatory permit
   
118.07   Permit denial
   
118.08   Transfer of adult entertainment regulatory permits
   
118.09   Adult entertainment business performer permit
   
118.10   Investigation and action on application for performer permit
   
118.11   Suspension or revocation of adult entertainment business regulatory
permits and adult entertainment business performer permits
   
118.12   Additional permits required
   
118.13   Application for escort or figure model permit
   
118.14   Issuance and denial of escort or figure model permits
   
118.15   Revocation or suspension of escort or figure model permits
   
118.16   Term of permit
   
118.17   Appeal procedure
Facilities and Employees
   
118.18   Adult entertainment business development and performance standards
   
118.19   Register and permit number of employees
   
118.20   Display of permit and identification cards
   
118.21   Employment or services rendered to persons under the age of 18 years
prohibited
Miscellaneous Provisions
   
118.22   Inspection
   
118.23   Regulations nonexclusive
   
118.24   Employment of persons without permits unlawful
   
118.25   Time limit for filing application for permit
   
118.26   Certain conduct in bars prohibited
   
118.27   Nuisance per se
Cross-reference:
   Zoning of Adult Entertainment Businesses, see Ch.
154
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 118.01 LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult oriented businesses in
order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose
nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it
is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by
adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to
deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of
this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 118.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES. Shall include any one of the following:
      (1)   ADULT ARCADE. An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar
machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films,
computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions, 30% or more of the number of which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment that has 30% or more of its stock
in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form
of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
and/or specified anatomical areas.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, restaurant, or similar business
establishment which:
         (a)   Regularly features live performances which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities; and/or
         (b)   Shows films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photograph reproductions, 30% or more of the number
of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (4)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS PERFORMER. A person engaging in or
participating in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or
involving specified sexual activities in an adult entertainment business.
      (5)   ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL. A hotel or motel or similar business
establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration
which:
         (a)   Provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
other photographic reproductions, 30% or more of the number of which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical area; and
         (b)   Rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a 6-hour period,
or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period.
      (6)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business establishment where, for
any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and
30% or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (7)   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live
performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      (8)   ESCORT BUREAU. A business which, for pecuniary compensation,
consideration, hire, or reward, furnishes or offers to furnish escorts.
      (9)   MODELING STUDIO. A business which provides, for pecuniary
compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models
who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display specified
anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or
otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. MODELING STUDIO does
not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of
Education. MODELING STUDIO further does not include a studio or similar
facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of
artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available specified sexual
activities.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS OPERATOR. A person who supervises, manages,
inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for
or in charge of the premises of an adult entertainment business or the conduct
or activities occurring on the premises thereof.
   APPLICANT. A person who is required to file an application for a permit
under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of
a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an adult
entertainment business.
   BAR. Any commercial establishment licensed by the State Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises.
   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON. Shall mean and refer to
the dominant or essential theme of the object described by this phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon" the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are
those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of
the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. (See Pringle v. City of
Covina, 115 Cal. App. 3d 151 (1981))
   ESCORT. A person who, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other
consideration, hire or reward:
      (1)   Escorts or accompanies others to or about social affairs,
entertainment or places of amusement; or
      (2)   Keeps company with others about any place or public resort or
within any private quarters; or
      (3)   Agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately
perform a striptease for another person; or
      (4)   Agrees to provide any service which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities.
   FIGURE MODEL. Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration,
hire, or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted,
drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Health Officer/Director of Environmental Resource of
Stanislaus County, or authorized representative.
   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of
the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the
nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
   OPERATE AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS. The supervising, managing,
inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling, or in any way being responsible
for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult entertainment
business or activities within an adult entertainment business.
   PERMITTEE. The person to whom an adult entertainment business permit is
issued.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, association,
joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form
or character.
   REGULARLY FEATURES. With respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret, means
a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occurs on two or more
occasions within a 30-day period; three or more occasions within a 60-day
period; or four or more occasions within a 180-day period, shall to the extent
permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SHERIFF'S COMMANDER. The Chief Law Enforcement officer assigned to the
Riverbank Substation of the Stanislaus County Sheriff's Department.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Shall mean and include any of the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic
region; buttocks; and female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      (3)   Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of the body
parts included in (1) or (2) above.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Shall mean and include any of the following,
whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;
      (2)   Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
other activities described in (1) through (3) above.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 118.03 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Adult entertainment business regulatory permit. It shall be unlawful
for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged
in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city, the operation
of an adult entertainment business, unless the person first obtains and
continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit from the city as herein
required.
   (B)   Adult entertainment business performer permit. It shall be unlawful
for any persons to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting
specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult
entertainment business unless the person first obtains and continues in full
force and effect a permit from the city as herein required.
   (C)   Escort permit, figure model permit. It shall be unlawful for any
parson to act as an escort, figure model, or to take any other position of
employment with an escort bureau or modeling studio in the city unless the
person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a
permit from the city as herein required.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS
§ 118.04 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS REGULATORY PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Every person who proposes to maintain, operate or conduct an adult
entertainment business in the city shall file an application with the Sheriff's
Commander upon a form provided by the city, and shall pay a filing fee as
established by resolution adopted by the City Council from time to time, which
shall not be refundable.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 118.05 APPLICATIONS.
   Adult entertainment business regulatory permits are nontransferable, except
in accordance with §
118.08. Therefore, all applications shall include the following information:
   (A)   (1)   If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state
his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory
written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the
partnership's complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the
partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership
agreement, if any.
      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide
its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation
is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all
officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent, and the
address of the registered office for service of process.
   (B)   If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the
application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the
business entity or an individual with a 10% or greater interest in the business
entity shall sign the application.
   (C)   If the applicant intends to operate the adult entertainment business
under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the
fictitious name of the adult business and show proof of registration of the
fictitious name.
   (D)   A description of the type of adult entertainment business for which
the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult business will
operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult
entertainment business site.
   (E)   The address to which notice of action on the application is to be
mailed.
   (F)   The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other persons
who will perform are required by §
118.09 to obtain an adult entertainment business performer license. On-going
reporting requirements are also set forth in §
118.09.
   (G)   A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the
premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult
entertainment business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches.
   (H)   A certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior
to application, depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied
by the adult entertainment business, and the property line of any other adult
entertainment business within 500 feet of the primary entrance of the adult
entertainment business for which a permit is requested; and the property lines
of any church, school, park, or residential zone within 300 feet of the primary
entrance of the adult entertainment business.
   (I)   A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of the
adult entertainment business, showing the location of the lighting system
required by §
118.18.
   (J)   If the Sheriff's Commander determines that the applicant has completed
the application improperly, the Sheriff's Commander shall promptly notify the
applicant of such fact and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an
extension of time of ten days or less to complete the application properly. In
addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten days, of
the time for the Sheriff's Commander to act on the application. The time period
for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the
applicant is granted an extension of time.
   (K)   The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state of city
permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of
obtaining an adult entertainment business regulatory permit.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 118.06 INVESTIGATION AND ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
BUSINESS REGULATORY PERMIT.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application
and permit fees, the Sheriff's Commander shall immediately stamp the
application as received and promptly investigate the information contained in
the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an adult
entertainment business regulatory permit.
   (B)   Within 30 days of receipt of the completed application, the Sheriff's
Commander shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in
accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as
follows:
      (1)   The Sheriff's Commander shall write or stamp "Granted" or "Denied"
on the application and date and sign the notation.
      (2)   If the applicant is denied, the Sheriff's Commander shall attach to
the application a statement of the reasons for denial.
      (3)   If the application is granted, the Sheriff's Commander shall attach
to the application an adult entertainment business regulatory permit.
      (4)   The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall
be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to
the applicant at the address stated in the application.
   (C)   The Sheriff's Commander shall grant the application and issue the
adult entertainment business regulatory permit upon findings that the proposed
business meets the locational criteria of §
154.03 of this code, and that the applicant has met all of the development and
performance standards and requirements of §
118.18, unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set
forth in §
118.07. The permittee shall post the permit conspicuously in the adult
entertainment business premises.
   (D)   If the Sheriff's Commander grants the application, or if the Sheriff's
Commander neither grants nor denies the application within 30 days after it is
stamped as received (except as provided in §§
118.04 and
118.05), the applicant may begin operating the adult entertainment business for
which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development
and performance standards and requirements of §
118.18.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 118.07 PERMIT DENIAL.
   (A)   The Sheriff's Commander shall deny the application for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the
business for which an adult entertainment business regulatory permit is
required do not comply with the requirements and standards of the health,
zoning, fire and safety laws of the city and the State of California, or with
the locational or development and performance standards and requirements of
these regulations.
      (2)   The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director,
officer, shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult business
regulatory permit.
      (3)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (4)   The required application fee has not been paid.
   (B)   Each adult entertainment business regulatory permit shall expire one
year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed only by filing with the
Sheriff's Commander a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual
permit fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal
shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the permit. When
made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit
will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided
herein for action upon applications for permits.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 118.08 TRANSFER OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT REGULATORY PERMITS.
   (A)   A permittee shall not operate an adult entertainment business under
the authority of an adult entertainment business regulatory permit at any place
other than the address of the adult entertainment business stated in the
application for the permit.
   (B)   A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult
entertainment business, or transfer an adult entertainment business regulatory
permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment
to the permit from the Sheriff's Commander, stating that the transferee is now
the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files
an application with the Sheriff's Commander in accordance with §§
118.03 and
118.04, accompanies the application with a transfer fee in an amount set by
resolution of the City Council, and the Sheriff's Commander determines in
accordance with §
118.05 that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an original
permit.
   (C)   No permit may be transferred when the Sheriff's Commander has notified
the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.
   (D)   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in
violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be
deemed revoked.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 118.09 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS PERFORMER PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance
depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities
in an adult entertainment business without a valid adult entertainment business
performer permit issued by the city. All persons who have been issued an adult
entertainment business regulatory permit shall promptly supplement the
information provided as part of the application for the permit required by §
118.04, with the names of all performers required to obtain an adult
entertainment business performer permit, within 30 days of any change in the
information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes shall be
grounds for suspension of the adult entertainment business regulatory permit.
   (B)   The Sheriff's Commander shall grant, deny and renew adult
entertainment business employee permits.
   (C)   The application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Sheriff's Commander. An original and two copies of the completed and sworn
permit application shall be filed with the Sheriff's Commander.
   (D)   The completed application shall contain the following information and
be accompanied by the following documents:
      (1)   The applicant's legal name and any other names (including stage
names and aliases) used by the applicant;
      (2)   Age, date and place of birth;
      (3)   Height, weight, hair and eye color;
      (4)   Present residence address and telephone number;
      (5)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of:
         (a)   Any of the offenses set forth in Cal. Penal Code §§ 315, 316,
266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(a), 647(b) and 647(d) as those
sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered.
         (b)   The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the State of
California.
      (6)   Whether the person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a
prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to
engage in prostitution in any other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in
this division has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or
otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution,
a statement shall be submitted giving the place of registration, licensing or
legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which the person was so
licensed, registered, or authorized to engage in prostitution;
      (7)   State driver's license or identification number;
      (8)   Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years
of age;
      (9)   The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Sheriff's
Commander, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant's face. Any
fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;
      (10)   If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license,
the applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed.
   (E)   The completed application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
application fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the City
Council.
   (F)   Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application fees,
the Sheriff's Commander shall immediately stamp the application as received and
promptly investigate the application.
   (G)   If the Sheriff's Commander determines that the applicant has completed
the application improperly, the Sheriff's Commander shall promptly notify the
applicant of the fact and grant the applicant an extension of time of not more
than ten days to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant
may request an extension, not to exceed ten days, of the time for the City
Manager to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a
permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an
extension of time.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 118.10 INVESTIGATION AND ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR PERFORMER PERMIT.
   (A)   Within five days after receipt of the properly completed application,
the Sheriff's Commander shall grant or deny the application and so notify the
applicant as follows:
      (1)   The Sheriff's Commander shall write or stamp "Granted" or "Denied"
on the application and date and sign the notation.
      (2)   If the application is denied, the Sheriff's Commander shall attach
to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.
      (3)   If the application is granted, the Sheriff's Commander shall attach
to the application an adult entertainment business employee permit.
      (4)   The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall
be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to
the applicant at the residence address stated in the application.
   (B)   The Sheriff's Commander shall grant the application and issue the
permit unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set
forth in division (D) of this section.
   (C)   If the Sheriff's Commander grants the application, or if the Sheriff's
Commander neither grants nor denies the application within five days after it
is stamped as received (except as provided in §
118.09), the applicant may begin performing in the capacity for which the
license was sought.
   (D)   The Sheriff's Commander shall deny the application for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in
any report or document required to be filed with the application;
      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (3)   The adult entertainment business employee permit is to be used for
performing in a business prohibited by state or city law;
      (4)   The applicant has been registered in any state as a prostitute;
      (5)   The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated
in §
118.09 or convicted of an offense outside the State of California that would
have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within the State of
California. A permit may be issued to any person convicted of the described
crimes if the conviction occurred more than five years prior to the date of the
application.
   (E)   Each adult entertainment business performer permit shall expire one
year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed only by filing with the
Sheriff's Commander a written request for renewal, accompanied by the
application fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal
shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the permit. When
made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit
will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided
herein for applications for permits.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 118.11 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS REGULATORY
PERMITS AND ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS PERFORMER PERMITS.
   An adult entertainment business regulatory permit or adult entertainment
business performer permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the
procedures and standards of this section.
   (A)   On determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, the Sheriff's
Commander shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation
to the permittee. The notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing,
and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent code
sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The
notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of
the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least ten
days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with
procedures established by the Sheriff's Commander, but at a minimum shall
include the following: all parties involved shall have a right to offer
testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be
represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine
witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence
upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious
affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time
for the convenience of a party or a witness. The Sheriff's Commander's decision
may be appealed in accordance with §
118.17.
   (B)   A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his permit,
or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the
following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an
employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult
entertainment business:
      (1)   In the case of a permittee of an adult entertainment business
regulatory permit only, the building, structure, equipment, or location used by
the adult entertainment business fails to comply with all applicable building,
fire, electrical, plumbing, health, and zoning requirements of this Code of
Ordinances, all applicable state and federal requirements of a similar nature
which are customarily enforced by the city, and all provisions of these
regulations and this code relating to adult entertainment businesses, including
the adult entertainment business development and performance standards
contained in §
118.18.
      (2)   The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in
any report or record required to be filed with the city.
      (3)   The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or
manager of an adult entertainment business has knowingly allowed or permitted,
and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of
the following on the premises of the adult entertainment business, or in the
case of an adult entertainment business performer, the permittee has engaged in
one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult
entertainment business:
         (a)   Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
or masturbation.
         (b)   Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations
for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur.
         (c)   Any conduct constituting a criminal offense, which required
registration under Cal. Penal Code, § 290.
         (d)   The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or
prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Cal. Penal Code,
§§ 315, 316, or 318 or 647(b).
         (e)   Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California
Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to
minors, including but not limited to Cal. Penal Code §§ 311 through 313.4.
         (f)   Any conduct prohibited by this chapter.
      (4)    Failure to abide by a disciplinary action previously imposed by an
appropriate city official.
   (C)   After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this
section, if the Sheriff's Commander finds and determines that there are grounds
for disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violation, the
Sheriff's Commander shall impose one of the following:
      (1)   A warning;
      (2)   Suspension of the permit, for a specified period not to exceed six
months;
      (3)   Revocation of the permit.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 118.12 ADDITIONAL PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall act as an escort unless an escort permit is first
obtained.
   (B)   No person shall act as a figure model in a modeling studio unless a
figure model permit is first obtained. The issuance of a business license
pursuant to §
110.04 of this Code of Ordinances shall not authorize acting as an escort, or
as a figure model in a modeling studio, until the necessary regulatory permit
has been lawfully granted.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.13 APPLICATION FOR ESCORT OR FIGURE MODEL PERMIT.
   (A)   An applicant for an escort or figure model permit shall make an
application under penalty of perjury to the Sheriff's Commander or his
authorized representative upon a form provided by the city. A non-refundable
fee, as established by resolution adopted by the City Council from time to
time, shall be paid to the city to reimburse the city for the cost of the
investigation. A copy of the receipt issued by the City Finance Department
shall accompany the application. The permit fee required under this section is
in addition to any other license or permit fee required by this Code of
Ordinances.
   (B)   The application for permit does not authorize the applicant to act as
an escort or as a figure model until the permit has been granted.
   (C)   Every application submitted to the Sheriff's Commander shall include
the following information:
      (1)   The applicant's full name, any other names used, date of birth,
California driver's license number or California identification number, social
security number, present residence address, telephone number, sex, height,
weight, color of hair, and color of eyes.
      (2)   Previous two residence addresses of the applicant and the inclusive
dates at each address.
      (3)   The applicant's business, occupation, and employment history for
five years preceding the date of application and inclusive dates of same.
      (4)   The permit history of the applicant; whether the person ever had
any permit or license issued to him or her by any other public entity in this
state; the date of issuance of any such permit or license, whether any such
permit or license has ever been revoked or suspended; and if any such license
or permit has been revoked or suspended, the reason therefore.
      (5)   All convictions for any crimes involving conduct which requires
registration under any state law similar to and including Cal. Penal Code §
290, or of conduct which is a violation of the provisions of any state laws
similar to and including Cal. Penal Code §§ 243.4, 261, 261.5, 262, 266a, 266b,
266c, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 267, 309, 311.2, 311.3, 311.4,
311.5, 311.6, 311.10, 311.11, 313.1, 314, 315, 336, 318, 647(a), 647(b), 647
(d), or 647.6.
      (6)   Any offense requiring registration under provisions of Cal. Health
and Safety Code § 11590; or any felony offense involving the possession,
possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, giving away of a
controlled substance specified in Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11054 through
11058, or as those sections may hereafter be amended or renumbered.
      (7)   Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a
prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to
engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in
this division has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or
otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution,
a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing
or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which the person was so
licensed, registered, or authorized to engage in prostitution.
      (8)   Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of
age.
      (9)   A complete set of fingerprints acceptable to the Sheriff's
Commander.
      (10)   The applicant shall make himself or herself available to the
Riverbank Substation of the Stanislaus County Sheriff's office to be
photographed.
      (11)   Authorization from the city, its agents, and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.14 ISSUANCE AND DENIAL OF ESCORT OR FIGURE MODEL PERMITS.
   (A)   The Sheriff's Commander or his authorized representative shall have 30
days from the date the application is accepted as complete in which to
investigate the application and background of the applicant. Upon completion of
the investigation, the Sheriff's Commander or his designated representative
shall approve or deny the permit. The Sheriff's Commander may refuse to issue
permit for escort or figure model for any of the following reasons, which
reasons will be set forth fully in writing and delivered to the applicant:
      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated
in §
118.13 (C)(5) and (C)(6), or convicted of an offense outside the State of
California that would have constituted any of the described offenses if
committed within the State of California. A permit may be issued to any person
convicted of any of the crimes described if such conviction occurred more than
five years prior to the date of the application.
      (2)   The applicant has been licensed or registered in any state as a
prostitute.
      (3)   Any false statements made in the initial application for escort or
figure model permit.
      (4)   That the applicant has had an escort or figure model permit denied
or revoked for cause by this city within the last five years.
      (5)   That the applicant is not at least 18 years of age.
      (6)   That the applicant has not paid the required fee to the City
Finance Department.
   (B)   An application for renewal for an escort or figure model permit shall
be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee, as established by resolution
adopted by the City Council from time to time.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 118.15 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF ESCORT OR FIGURE MODEL PERMITS.
   After following the procedure in §
118.11, the Sheriff's Commander may revoke or suspend an escort or figure model
permit for conviction of any of the crimes specified in §
118.13(C)(5) and (C)(6). The decision of the Sheriff's Commander shall be in
writing and shall be mailed postage prepaid to the escort or figure model.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 118.16 TERM OF PERMIT.
   Permits issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be valid for a
period of one year from the date of issuance and shall be renewable annually.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 118.17 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any permit applicant may appeal any adverse action taken under this
chapter to the City Council.
   (B)   All appeals taken under this chapter must be taken within 30 days
after the adverse action by filing with the office of the City Clerk a written
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. An appeal shall be accompanied
by a non-refundable filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the
City Council from time to time.
   (C)   The City Clerk, upon the filing of such appeal and payment of an
appeal fee, shall place the matter upon the agenda for the next regular meeting
of the City Council occurring not earlier than five days after the filing of
the appeal, and shall notify the appealing permit applicant by letter of the
meeting date and place at which the appeal will be heard.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
FACILITIES AND EMPLOYEES
§ 118.18 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be
regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the local Fire District and
building regulations and standards adopted by the city.
   (B)   No adult entertainment business shall be operated in any manner that
permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any
public way or from any location outside the building or area of the
establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign,
show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall
be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any
exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.
   (C)   All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually
oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation
with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal
illumination of one footcandle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways.
The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient
illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented
business for the personal safety of patrons and employees, and to reduce the
incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the
required sketch or diagram of the premises.
   (D)   The premises within which the adult entertainment business is located
shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated
inside the premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or
public right-of way, or within any other building or other separate unit within
the same building.
   (E)   Except for those businesses also regulated by the California
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, an adult entertainment business shall
be open for business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on
any particular day.
   (F)   The building entrance to an adult entertainment business shall be
clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under 18 years
of age are precluded from entering the premises. The notice shall be
constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the Community Development
Director or designee. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted
within the premises at any time.
   (G)   All indoor areas of the adult entertainment business within which
patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view by the
management at all times.
   (H)   The adult entertainment business shall provide and maintain separate
restroom facilities for all patrons and employees, and female patrons and
employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the
restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited
from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair,
maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be
free from any adult material. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors
or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction
equipment. The foregoing provisions of this division shall not apply to an
adult entertainment business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of
adult material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult
bookstore and adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities
to its patrons or the general public.
   (I)   The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult
entertainment businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified
anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities:
      (1)   No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult
entertainment business except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the level
of the floor, which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet from the
nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within ten
feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. ENTERTAINER
shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult
entertainment business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or
other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an
adult entertainment business.
      (2)   The adult entertainment business shall provide separate dressing
room facilities for entertainers, which are exclusively dedicated to the
entertainers' use.
      (3)   The adult entertainment business shall provide an entrance/exit for
entertainers, which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.
      (4)   The adult entertainment business shall provide access for
entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely
separated from the patrons. If a separate access is not physically feasible,
the adult business shall provide a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle for
entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing,
fence, or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of
(and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between the
patrons and entertainers.
      (5)   No person who is required to obtain a permit pursuant to §
118.09 either before, during or after performances shall have physical contact
with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer
either before, during or after performances by the entertainer. This division
shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult entertainment
business.
      (6)   Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained,
establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this
division.
      (7)   No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any
entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any
patron.
      (8)   No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult
entertainment business as that term is defined herein shall permit any person
on the premises of the adult oriented business to engage in a live showing of
the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a
fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque
coverage over any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in
a discernibly turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by the
applying of an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified
anatomical part required to be covered.
   (J)   Adult entertainment businesses shall employ security guards in order
to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards:
      (1)   Adult entertainment businesses featuring live entertainment shall
provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open. If
the occupancy limit of the premises is greater
then 35 persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty.
      (2)   Security guards for other adult entertainment businesses may be
required if it is determined by the Sheriff's Commander that their presence is
necessary in order to prevent any of the conduct listed in §
118.11(B)(3) from occurring on the premises.
      (3)   Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of
law and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these
regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be
readily identifiable as a security guard by the public, and shall be duly
licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law.
No security guard required pursuant to this division shall act as a door
person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the
manager's station while acting as a security guard.
   (K)   The foregoing applicable requirements of this section shall be deemed
conditions of adult entertainment business regulatory permit approvals, and
failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation
of the permit issued pursuant to these regulations.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.19 REGISTER AND PERMIT NUMBERS OF EMPLOYEES.
   Every permittee of an adult entertainment business which provides live
entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified
sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the
premises and their permit numbers. The register shall be available for
inspection during regular business hours by any police officer or health
officer of the city, or persons contracted by the city to perform such
services.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.20 DISPLAY OF PERMIT AND IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (A)   Every adult entertainment business shall display at all times during
business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for
such adult entertainment business in a conspicuous place so that the same may
be readily seen by all persons entering the adult entertainment business.
   (B)   The Sheriff's Commander shall provide each adult entertainment
business performer required to have a permit pursuant to this chapter with an
identification card containing the name, address, photograph and permit number
of the performer.
   (C)   The Sheriff's Commander shall provide each escort or figure model
granted a permit with an identification card containing the name, address,
photograph, and permit number of the escort or figure model.
   (D)   An escort shall carry the card at all times while providing escort
services.
   (E)   A figure model shall have the card available for inspection at all
times during the hours of operation of the model studio.
   (F)   An adult entertainment business performer shall have the card
available for inspection at all times during which that person is on the
premises of the adult entertainment business.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.21 EMPLOYMENT OR SERVICES RENDERED TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in
charge of any adult entertainment business to employ any person who is not at
least 18 years of age.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator or other person in
charge of any adult-oriented business to permit to enter or remain within the
adult-oriented business any person who is not at least 18 years of age.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 118.22 INSPECTION.
   An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Sheriff's
Department, Health Department, Consolidated Fire Protection District, Planning
Division, or other city departments or agencies or other entities which perform
such services for the city to inspect the premises of an adult entertainment
business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law and the
development and performance standards applicable to adult entertainment
businesses, at any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who
operates an adult entertainment business, or his or her agent or employee, is
in violation of the provisions of this section if he/she refuses to permit such
lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.23 REGULATIONS NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The provisions of this chapter regulating adult entertainment businesses are
not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse
noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of
businesses as adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 118.24 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS WITHOUT PERMITS UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or permittee in
charge of or in control of an adult entertainment business which provides live
entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified
sexual activities to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is not
in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult entertainment business performer
permit.
   (B)   No permittee or operator of an escort service shall allow or permit a
person to act as an escort for such service unless the person possesses a valid
escort permit under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the
responsibility of the permittee and the operator to ensure that each person
employed as an escort shall first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to this
chapter.
   (C)   No permittee or operator of a model studio shall allow or permit a
person to act as a figure model for the studio unless the person possesses a
valid figure model permit under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the
responsibility of the permittee and the operator to ensure that each person
employed as a figure model shall first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to
this chapter.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.25 TIME LIMIT FOR FILING APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   All persons who possess an outstanding business license heretofore issued
for the operation of an adult entertainment business, and all persons required
by this chapter to obtain an adult entertainment business performer permit,
escort permit, or a figure model permit, must apply for and obtain such a
permit within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. Failure to do so
and continued operation of an adult entertainment business, or the continued
performances depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities in an adult entertainment business after such time without a permit
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.26 CERTAIN CONDUCT IN BARS PROHIBITED.
   The City Council finds that barroom nudity is a direct cause of increased
demand for police services in and about such establishments, and finds further
that the activities commonly engaged in by both employees and patrons of such
establishments are inimical to the public welfare in that nudity in such
establishments has been demonstrated to increase the occurrence of illegal
activity in and occurring around such establishments. Accordingly, the
following acts or conduct on the premises of any bar are deemed contrary to the
public interest and welfare and the best interest of the community and,
therefore:
   (A)   No bar owner of operator or any employee thereof shall permit any
person on the premises to display or expose his or her genitals, pubic hair,
buttocks, anal region, or any portion of the female breast at or below the
areola thereof.
   (B)   No bar owner or operator or employee thereof shall permit any person
on the premises to perform specified sexual activities as defined in §
118.02.
   (C)   Any bar owner, operator or employee thereof who permits any of the
above while alcoholic beverages are being sold or in the presence of anyone who
has consumed any alcoholic beverages on the premises at any time during the
four hours immediately preceding the act or display referred to above shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Any person who exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, anal
region, or any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof on
the premises while alcoholic beverage are being sold, or on the premises and in
the presence of anyone who has consumed any alcoholic beverages on the premises
at any time during the four hours immediately preceding the display or exposure
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.27 NUISANCE PER SE.
   Violations of §§
154.01 through
154.03,
118.03,
118.08,
118.09,
118.11,
118.12,
118.16,
118.21,
118.22, or
118.26 shall constitute a nuisance per se, whether or not the violations are
repeated or intentional, subject to abatement at the expense of the person or
persons creating, causing, committing, or maintaining any of these violations.
Where a violation of a valid ordinance is proven, the cost, including court
costs and attorney's fees relating to any proof, shall be recoverable in
addition to any other abatement related costs, both as a personal obligation of
the violator and of the property owner owning the property where the violation
occurred, and as a lien against that property, in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 38773, 38773.1 or 38773.5 as they
exist now or may be amended or recodified in the future. The City Attorney may,
in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action or revoking the
appropriate permits, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings
for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by
law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such other court or
courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such a relief as will abate or remove
such adult entertainment business and restrain and enjoin any person from
operating, conducting, or maintaining an adult entertainment business contrary
to the provisions of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Zoning of Adult Entertainment Businesses, see Ch.
154
CHAPTER 119: MASSAGE/BODYWORK ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
119.01   Legislative purpose
   
119.02   Definitions
Applications and Permits
   
119.03   Permit required
   
119.04   Certification required
   
119.05   Business license required
   
119.06   Fees
   
119.07   Application for operator permit
   
119.08   Operator permit issuance and denial
   
119.09   Application for massage practitioner/employee
   
119.10   Massage practitioner permit issuance and denial
   
119.11   Application/operation school of massage
   
119.12   Verification
   
119.13   Referral to other departments
Requirements and Restrictions
 
   
119.14   Massage establishments, generally
   
119.15   Massage establishment hours
   
119.16   Changes of business
   
119.17   Transfer and renewal of permits
   
119.18   Exemptions
   
119.19   Suspension, revocation, denial and appeal
   
119.20   Attorney’s fees and costs
   
119.21   Persons employed under age 18 not permitted
   
119.22   Persons employed without permits not allowed
   
119.23   Onsite therapy and out-call massage
   
119.24   Violation and penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 119.01 LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the
orderly regulation of the massage/bodywork businesses and massage practitioners
in the city and to comply with state regulations.
      (1)   The city recognizes massage is a viable professional field offering
the public health and therapeutic services, including but not limited to,
massage and bodywork therapies. The permit requirements and restrictions
imposed by this chapter are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the city.
      (2)   This chapter establishes minimum standards for massage and bodywork
practitioners and their business establishments so as to protect and safeguard
the public health, safety and welfare.
      (3)   The city is authorized, by virtue of the California Constitution
and Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 51030 et seq., to regulate massage establishments by
imposing reasonable standards relative to the skill and experience of massage
operators and massage practitioners and reasonable conditions on the operation
of massage establishments.
   (B)   It is the purpose and intent of the city that massage/bodywork
establishments and persons offering such services be regulated so as to ensure
that such persons possess the minimum qualifications necessary to operate such
businesses and to perform the services offered, and to ensure that those
offering these services conduct their work in a lawful and professional manner,
and comply with required building, sanitation, and health standards.
   (C)   There is significant risk of injury to massage clients by improperly
trained and/or educated massage practitioners and this chapter provides
reasonable safeguards against injury and economic loss.
   (D)   There is opportunity for acts of prostitution and other unlawful
sexual activity to occur in massage establishments. Courts have long recognized
that massage is a pervasively regulated activity and brothels might attempt to
operate as massage establishments. The establishment of reasonable standards
for issuance of permits and restrictions on operations would serve to reduce
the risk of illegal activity without significantly burdening legitimate
businesses.
   (E)   The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter reduce the
burdens on the Police Department and permit the deployment of police personnel
such that more serious crimes may be prevented and more important laws
enforced.
   (F)   The regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter tend to
discourage massage establishments from degenerating into houses of prostitution
and the means utilized in this chapter bear a reasonable and rational
relationship to the goals sought to be achieved.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord.
2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CALIFORNIA MASSAGE THERAPY COUNCIL (CAMTC). The non-profit organization
created to regulate the massage industry set forth in Cal. Business and
Professions Code Division 2, Chapter 10.5 (commencing with § 4600).
   CAMTC CERTIFICATE. A current and valid certificate issued by the CAMTC to a
certified massage therapist or certified massage practitioner pursuant to Cal.
Business and Professions Code §§ 4600 et seq.
   CERTIFIED MASSAGE PRACTITIONER. Any individual certified by the CAMTC as a
massage therapist or massage practitioner pursuant to Cal. Business and
Professions Code §§ 4600 et seq.
   CERTIFIED TRANSCRIPTS. Course transcripts that are received sealed by the
Police Department from a recognized school of massage or qualified massage
educational program.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Riverbank.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Riverbank or his or her
designated representative.
   COMPENSATION. A payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, or
gift of money, or anything of value.
   CONVICTION and CONVICTED. A plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction
following a plea of nolo contendre.
   EMPLOY. Includes contracting with independent contractors.
   EMPLOYEE. Includes independent contractors.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Stanislaus County Health Department.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The person designated by the city as Health Officer, or his
or her authorized representative.
   MANAGER. The person(s) designated by the operator of the massage
establishment to act as the representative and agent of the operator in
managing day-to-day operations with the same liabilities and responsibilities.
Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to, evidence that the
individual has power to direct or hire and dismiss employees, control hours of
operation, create policy or rules or purchase supplies. A manager may also be
an operator. A massage practitioner permit is not required to qualify as a
manager. A manager may not perform any massage services without first meeting
the standards and qualifications of massage practitioner.
   MASSAGE. The scientific manipulation of the soft tissues. For purposes of
this chapter, the terms MASSAGE and BODYWORK shall have the same meaning.
   MASSAGE/BODYWORK ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment having a fixed place of
business where any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
combination thereof engages in, carries on, or permits to be engaged in or
carried on, any massage/bodywork activity for compensation or any
other consideration. Any establishment engaged in, carrying on, or permitting
any combination of massage/bodywork and bathhouse is a MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   MASSAGE/BODYWORK PRACTITIONER. Any person who for any consideration
whatsoever engages in the practice of massage/bodywork techniques as defined in
this section, unless otherwise exempted.
   MASSAGE/BODYWORK TECHNIQUES. Any method of pressure on or friction against,
or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of
the external parts of another human body with the use of the hands, arms, or
other portions of the body, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical
apparatus or appliances, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing
alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or
other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. MASSAGE should also
include the giving of any baths as listed below under PUBLIC BATHHOUSE.
   MASSAGE THERAPY ACT. Provisions in Cal. Business and Professions Code
Division 2, Chapter 10.5 (commencing with § 4600).
   OPERATOR. All persons who have an ownership interest in the massage
establishment and are responsible for its day-to-day operations.
   OUT-CALL MASSAGE SERVICE. To engage in or perform massage/bodywork for a fee
or other consideration at a location other than a duly licensed massage/
bodywork establishment or school of massage.
   PERSON. Any individual, co-partnership, firm, association, joint-stock
company, corporation, or combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
   POLICE CHIEF. The Police Chief of the City of Riverbank Police Services or
his or her designated representative.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The police services of the City of Riverbank.
   PUBLIC BATHHOUSE. Any place, including a private club or organization,
except as otherwise provided, wherein any person, firm, association,
corporation, or partnership engages in, conducts or carries on, or permits to
be engaged in, conducted or carried on, or the giving or furnishing of Russian,
Finnish, Swedish, hot air, vapor, electric cabinet, steam, mineral, sweat,
salt, Japanese, sauna, fomentation, or electric baths, or baths of any kind
whatever, including any form of body shampoo. Ordinary tub baths or showers
where an attendant is not required, is excluded.
   REFLEXOLOGY. An integrative health practice that maps a reflection of the
body predominantly on the feet, hands and outer ears. It uses unique manual
techniques to deliver pressure to neural pathways assisting the body to
function optimally.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord.
2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS
§ 119.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to
permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in
the city, the operation of a massage establishment, as defined in this chapter,
without first having obtained a permit from the city after approval by the
Police Chief and requisite city officers.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to act as a massage/bodywork
practitioner, instructor or trainee, or to take any other position of
employment with a massage establishment or school of massage, without
possessing a city business license, a valid CAMTC certificate obtained and
maintained in compliance with the Massage Therapy Act, and a permit issued by
the Police Chief in accordance with this section.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord.
2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.04 CERTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to perform or engage in the practice of
massage for compensation within the city without possessing a valid CAMTC
certificate obtained and maintained in compliance with the Massage Therapy Act,
and a permit issued by the Police Chief in accordance with this section. All
persons certified by the CAMTC shall have the right to perform or engage in the
practice of massage consistent with the Massage Therapy Act, the qualifications
established by his or her certification, and the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Persons that are granted an exemption from the CAMTC certification
requirement by the city will still be required to meet all other terms of this
chapter including but not limited to the background check required of massage
establishment owners that are not certified by the CAMTC. All persons under
this exemption will be required to display, in the same manner this chapter
requires the display of CAMTC certification, a separate statement from the city
to show that the person has met the requirements of this exemption. This
exemption must be renewed annually and the city may establish a non-refundable
fee to recover costs associated with such annual renewals.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.05 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any massage establishment to operate, or any
independently employed certified massage practitioner or therapist to perform
or engage in the practice of massage for compensation within the city, without
first obtaining a city business license;
   (B)   In applying for a city business license, a massage establishment owner
shall fill out an application and shall file along with the completed
application a copy of the current and valid CAMTC certificate and a CAMTC photo
identification card possessed by every person who will be performing or
engaging in the practice of massage at the massage establishment;
   (C)   In applying for a city business license, a certified massage
practitioner or therapist who will be independently employed shall fill out an
application and shall file along with the completed application a copy of his
or her current and valid CAMTC certificate and a CAMTC photo identification
card;
   (D)   Prior to the issuance of a city business license to any massage
establishment or any independently employed certified massage practitioner or
certified massage therapist, the Police Department shall make a reasonable
investigation into the information provided in the application, and shall
contact the CAMTC to verify the status of the CAMTC certificate(s) filed by the
business license applicant;
   (E)   No city business license shall be issued to a massage establishment
that will employ or contract with one or more persons to perform or engage in
the practice of massage without that person or persons possessing a current and
valid CAMTC certificate;
   (F)   No city business license shall be issued to a person who wishes to
perform or engage in the practice of massage for compensation within the city
and who does not possess a current and valid CAMTC certificate;
   (G)   The city may deny a business license to any applicant who has provided
materially false information in applying for a business license; and
   (H)   The Chief of Police may order that a business license required by this
chapter be revoked pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
110.26.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.06 FEES.
   The City Council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time may
amend the fees for the administration of this chapter. The city may include in
this resolution a health services fee schedule prescribing annual fees to be
paid by the operator of each massage establishment, such fees to be paid
directly to the Health Department and retained by the county as reimbursement
for the services related to this chapter. Fees required by this chapter shall
be in addition to any required by this code.
(Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08)
§ 119.07 APPLICATION FOR OPERATOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person seeking an operator permit for a massage establishment
shall file a written application on the required form with the Police Chief and
submit all required documentation. The application shall be accompanied by the
appropriate nonrefundable filing fee established by resolution of the City
Council. The application shall be completed and signed by the operator, or
authorized representative thereof, of the proposed massage establishment. The
permit application does not authorize the operation of a massage establishment
unless and until such permit has been properly granted. The application shall
contain or be accompanied by the following information:
      (1)   The type of ownership of the business. If the applicant is a
corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in
its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of
incorporation and the names and residential addresses of each of its current
officers and directors, and of each stockholder holding more than 5% of the
stock of that corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application
shall set forth the name and residence of each of the partners, including
limited partners. If it is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of
its certificate of limited partnership filed with the Secretary of State. If
one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this division
(1) pertaining to corporations shall apply. A corporate or partnership
applicant shall designate one of its officers or general partners to acts as
its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and
sign all application forms required for an individual applicant under this
chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged.
      (2)   The precise name under which the massage establishment is to be
conducted.
      (3)   The complete address and all telephone numbers of the massage
establishment.
      (4)   A complete and current list of the names and residential addresses
of all proposed massage practitioners and employees in the massage
establishment and the name and residential addresses of the manager(s) proposed
to be principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment.
      (5)   The proposed hours of operation of the massage establishment.
      (6)   A description of any other business operated on the same premises
or within the city or the state which is owned or operated by the applicant.
      (7)   For each person who will be providing massage therapy, a copy of
his or her current certification from CAMTC and a copy of his or her current
CAMTC issued identification card. For each owner who is a CAMTC certified
massage professional, a copy of his or her current certification from CAMTC and
a copy of his or her current CAMTC issued identification card.
      (8)   The following personal information concerning the operator
applicant:
         (a)   Current address and telephone number and all previous
residential addresses for the eight-years preceding the date of the
application;
         (b)   Acceptable proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
         (c)   Copies of driver’s license and Social Security card;
         (d)   Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and gender;
         (e)   Two current “passport” photographs of the applicant, each not
exceeding four square inches in size, and being only front views of the face
and head;
         (f)   The applicant’s complete business, occupation and employment
history for the eight years preceding the date of the application, including,
but not limited to, massage or similar business history and experience of the
applicant;
         (g)   The complete massage permit history of the applicant; whether
such person has ever held any certification, permit or license issued by any
agency, board, city, county, territory or state; the date of issuance of such a
certification, permit or license; and whether the certification, permit or
license was denied, revoked, or suspended, and the reasons therefore;
         (h)   All criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo contendre,
within the last eight years, including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to
Cal. Penal Code § 1203.4, but excluding minor traffic violations, and the date
and place of each such conviction and explanation thereof;
         (i)   A complete set of livescan as directed by the Police Department.
      (9)   The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property
upon which the business is to be conducted. In the event the applicant is not
the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a copy
of the lease and a notarized acknowledgment from the owner of the property that
a massage establishment will be located on his or her property.
      (10)   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek
verification of the information contained in the application.
      (11)   Such other identification and information as the Police Chief may
reasonably require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein
specified and as required to be set forth in the application.
      (12)   A statement in writing and dated by the applicant that he or she
certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the
application is true and correct.
      (13)   Statements in writing and dated by the applicant and the
applicant’s designated manager(s) certifying under penalty of perjury that
they:
         (a)   Will only employ or retain CAMTC certified massage
professionals, and failure to comply may result in the suspension or revocation
of the massage establishment permit;
         (b)   Have received a copy of this chapter;
         (c)   Understand its contents; and
         (d)   Understand the duties of an operator or manager, respectively,
as provided by this chapter.
   (B)   If operator is also going to be a massage practitioner, then all
requirements and additional applicable fees, as adopted by city resolution,
also must be met and paid prior to the issuance of a permit.
   (C)   If, during the term of a permit, the permit holder has any change in
information submitted on the original or renewal application, the permit holder
shall notify the Police Department of such change in writing within ten
business days thereafter.
(Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord. 2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.08 OPERATOR PERMIT ISSUANCE AND DENIAL.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complete permit application, the Police Chief shall
conduct an investigation to ascertain whether such permit should be issued as
requested. The Police Chief shall, within 60 days of receipt of an application,
approve, conditionally approve or deny the application. The 60-day period may
be extended for up to 30 additional days, if necessary, to complete the
investigation. The Police Chief shall issue such permit as requested, unless he
or she makes any of the following findings:
      (1)   The applicant, or any officers, directors, or partners, or any
person directly engaged or employed in the massage establishment, has within
the eight-years preceding the date of the application:
         (a)   Been convicted of a violation of Cal. Penal Code §§ 266, 266a,
266b, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, 647(a), (b), or
(d), or any other provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to
register under the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 290 or when the prosecution
accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendre to a charge of a violation of Cal.
Penal Code § 415 or any lesser included or lesser related offense in
satisfaction of, or as a substitute of, any of the previously listed crimes;
         (b)   Been convicted of a violation of Cal. Health and Safety Code §
11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution, or possession of
a controlled substance specified in Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11054,
11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058;
         (c)   Been convicted of any offense in any other state which is the
equivalent of any of the above-mentioned offenses;
         (d)   Been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting
or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 11225 et seq., or
any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the State of
California;
         (e)   Been convicted of an act involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or
moral turpitude, or an act of violence, which act or acts are related to the
qualifications, functions, or duties of an operator;
         (f)   Has had an operator or massage technician permit or other
similar certification, permit or license denied, suspended or revoked for cause
by a licensing authority or by any city, county or state.
      (2)   The applicant has made a false, misleading, or fraudulent statement
or omission of fact to the city in the permit application process.
      (3)   The application does not contain all of the information required by
§
119.09.
      (4)   The massage establishment, as proposed by the applicant, does not
comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning,
fire, and safety requirements and standards.
      (5)   The applicant has not satisfied the requirements of this chapter in
the time specified.
      (6)   Any individual offering or performing massage at or on behalf of a
massage business is not in possession of valid CAMTC certificate.
      (7)   If the application is denied for failure to comply with division
(A)(2) or (3) of this section, the applicant may not reapply for a period of
six months from the date the application was denied.
   (B)   All operators and managers shall comply with the following conditions
to the operator permit and any other reasonable conditions imposed by the
Police Chief:
      (1)   Prohibited massage areas. Except to the extent required, in
writing, by a state-licensed medical practitioner, no massage practitioner
shall massage the genitals or anal area of any patron or the breast(s) of any
female patron, nor shall any operator or manager of a massage establishment
allow or permit such massage pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code §
4609. No operator or manager, while performing any task or service associated
with the massage establishment, shall be present in any room with another
person unless the person’s genitals, gluteal crease, anus or, in the case of a
female patron, breast(s), are fully covered.
      (2)   Names. No operator granted a permit pursuant to this section shall
use any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in his or
her permit.
      (3)   Manager on premises. The massage establishment shall have a manager
on the premises at all times during hours of operation. The operator(s) shall
file a statement with the Police Chief designating the person with power to act
as a manager. The operator shall also file with the Police Chief a statement,
signed and dated by each manager designated after permit issuance, certifying
under penalty of perjury that they:
         (a)   Have received a copy of this chapter;
         (b)   Understand its contents; and
         (c)   Understand the duties of a manager as provided in this chapter.
      (4)   Licensed massage practitioner on premises. During the hours of
operation, the massage establishment shall have at least one massage
practitioner holding a current valid certificate issued by the CAMTC on the
premises and on duty at all times.
      (5)   Operator/manager responsibility. The operator and on-duty manager
shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while the employees are
on the licensed premises. An act or omission of any employee constituting a
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission
of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator permit shall
be revoked, suspended, denied, or renewed.
      (6)   Certified massage practitioners. The operator or manager shall not
employ any person as a massage practitioner who does not have a valid CAMTC
certificate. The operator shall report to the Police Chief any change of
employees, whether by new or renewed employment, discharge or termination, on
the form and in the manner required by the Police Chief. The report shall
contain the name of the employee and the date of hire or termination. The
report shall be made within five days of the date of hire or termination. The
operator shall deliver the permit and photo identification card of any massage
practitioner no longer employed by the operator to the Police Chief within five
days of employment termination.
      (7)   Insurance. No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the
business of a massage establishment unless there is on file with the Police
Chief, in full force and effect at all times, documents issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the state evidencing that the operator is
insured under a liability insurance policy providing minimum coverage of
$500,000 for injury or death arising out of the operation of the massage
establishment and/or the administration of a massage. Each operator shall
provide the Police Chief with evidence of insurance within 45 days prior to the
date of issuance of the permit.
      (8)   Compliance with code. The operator shall comply with all provisions
of this chapter and any applicable provisions of the Riverbank Municipal Code.
      (9)   Inspections and searches. By applying for a permit, the operator
consents to the inspection of the massage establishment by the city’s Building
Department, Police Department, Fire Department, and Health Department for the
purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter or other applicable
laws or regulations are met. The operator consents to the inspection of the
occupied massage rooms by the Police Department for the purpose of determining
that the provisions of this chapter are met upon occurrence of any of the
conditions described in §
119.14(B)(17) which would require the posting of the notice to all patrons.
(Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord. 2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.09 APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE PRACTITIONER/EMPLOYEE.
   (A)   Any person seeking a massage practitioner permit shall file a written
application on the required form with the Chief of Police. The application
shall be accompanied by the appropriate non-refundable filing fee established
by resolution of the City Council. The application shall be accompanied by the
required supporting documentation. The application shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   A statement of the exact location at which the applicant will be
working as a massage practitioner, including the full street address and all
telephone numbers associated with the location.
      (2)   The following personal information of the practitioner applicant:
         (a)   Full complete name and all aliases used by the applicant;
         (b)   Current address and telephone number and all previous
residential addresses for the eight years preceding the date of the
application;
         (c)   Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years
of age;
         (d)   Driver’s license and Social Security card;
         (e)   Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and gender;
         (f)   Two current “passport” photographs of the applicant, each not
exceeding four square inches in size, and being only front views of the face
and head;
         (g)   The applicant’s business, occupation and employment history of
the applicant for the eight years immediately preceding the date of the
application, including, but not limited to, massage or similar business history
and experience of the applicant;
         (h)   The complete massage permit history of the applicant: whether
such person has ever had any permit or license issued by any agency, board,
city, county, territory or state; the date of issuance of such a permit or
license; and whether the permit or license was denied, revoked or suspended,
and the reasons therefore.
      (3)   All criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo contendre, within
the last eight years, including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to Cal.
Penal Code § 1203.4, but excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and
place of each such conviction and explanation thereof.
      (4)   A complete set of livescan as directed by the Police Department.
      (5)   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek
verification of the information contained in the application.
      (6)   Such other identification and information as the Police Chief may
reasonably require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein
specified and as required to be set forth in the application.
      (7)   A statement in writing and dated by the applicant that he or she
certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the
application is true and correct.
      (8)   Statements in writing and dated by the applicant certifying under
penalty of perjury that he or she:
         (a)   Has received a copy of this chapter;
         (b)   Understands its contents; and,
         (c)   Understands the duties of a massage practitioner as provided in
this chapter.
      (9)   For each person who will be providing massage therapy, a copy of
his or her current certification from CAMTC and a copy of his or her current
CAMTC issued identification card. For each owner who is a CAMTC certified
massage professional, a copy of his or her current certification from CAMTC and
a copy of his or her current CAMTC issued identification card.
   (B)   If, during the term of a permit, a permit holder has any change in
information submitted on the original or renewal application, the permit holder
shall notify the Police Department of such change in writing within ten
business days thereafter.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord.
2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.10 MASSAGE PRACTITIONER PERMIT ISSUANCE AND DENIAL.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complete permit application, the Police Chief shall
conduct an investigation to ascertain whether such permit should be issued as
requested. The Police Chief shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the
application within 60 days of the filing of an application. The 60-day period
may be continued for up to 30 additional days, if necessary, to complete the
inspection. The Police Chief shall issue such permit as requested, unless he or
she makes any of the following findings:
      (1)   The applicant has, within eight years preceding the date of the
application, been convicted of any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of Cal. Penal Code §§ 266, 266a, 266b, 266d, 266e,
266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, 647(a), (b), or (d) or that the
applicant is required to register under the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 290
or when the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendre to a charge
of a violation of Cal. Penal Code § 415 or any lesser included or lesser
related offense in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the
previously listed crimes;
         (b)   A violation of Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11550 or any
offense involving the illegal sale, distribution, or possession of a controlled
substance specified in Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11054, 11055, 11056,
11057 or 11058;
         (c)   Any offense in any other state which is the equivalent of any of
the above-mentioned offenses; or
         (d)   An act involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude,
or an act of violence, which act or acts are substantially related to the
qualifications, functions, or duties of a massage practitioner.
      (2)   The applicant has had an operator permit or massage practitioner
permit or other similar license or permit denied, suspended, or revoked for
cause by a licensing authority or by any city, county or state within eight
years prior to the date of the application.
      (3)   The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent
statement or omission of fact to the city in the permit application process.
      (4)   The application does not contain the information required by §
119.09.
      (5)   The applicant has not satisfied the requirements of this chapter in
the time specified.
      (6)   If the application is denied for failure to comply with divisions
(A)(3) or (4) of this section, the applicant may not reapply for a period of
six months from the date the application was denied.
   (B)   All massage practitioners shall comply with the following conditions
and any other reasonable conditions specified by the Police Chief on issuance
of the massage practitioner permit.
      (1)   Prohibited massage areas. Except to the extent required, in
writing, by a state-licensed medical practitioner, no massage practitioner
shall massage the genitals or anal area of any patron or the breast(s) of any
female patron.
      (2)   Covering. No massage practitioner shall massage any patron unless
the person’s genitals, gluteal crease, anus and, in the case of a female
patron, breast(s), are fully covered at all times while the practitioner is
present in the same room as the patron.
      (3)   Identification cards. The massage practitioner shall wear a photo
identification card prepared and issued by the city at all times when present
in the massage establishment. Such identification shall be provided to city
regulatory officials upon demand. The identification card shall be placed on
outer clothing with the photo side facing out. If a massage practitioner
changes his or her business address, he or she shall, prior to such change,
obtain from the Police Chief a new photo identification card and advise the
Police Department, in writing, of the new business address.
      (4)   Massage locations. Massage practitioner shall not perform any
massage at any location other than the massage establishment specified on the
permit.
      (5)   Names. While on duty, the massage practitioner shall not use any
name other than that specified on the photo identification card.
      (6)   Clothing. The massage practitioner shall be fully clothed at all
times. Clothing shall be of a fully opaque, non- transparent material and
provide complete covering of the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anal area, and
chest.
      (7)   Inspections and searches. The massage practitioner consents to the
inspection of the massage establishment by the city’s Building Department,
Police Department, Fire Department, and Health Department for the purpose of
determining that the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws or
regulations are met. The massage practitioner consents to the inspection of the
occupied massage rooms by the Police Department for the purpose of determining
that the provisions of this chapter are met upon occurrence of any of the
conditions described in §
119.14(B)(17) which would require the posting of the notice to all patrons.
      (8)   Continuing education. On an annual basis, the massage practitioner
shall complete no fewer than 12 hours of continuing education in the practice
of massage from a qualified massage educational program.
(Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord. 2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.11 APPLICATION/OPERATION SCHOOL OF MASSAGE.
   Every application for a school of massage shall be accompanied by:
   (A)   Proof of approval from the CAMTC, pursuant to Cal. Business and
Professions Code §§ 4600 et seq.;
   (B)   Proof of approval pursuant to Cal. Education Code §§ 94900 or 94901;
   (C)   A statement of the educational and experience qualifications, and the
names and residence addresses of all directors, administrators, and
instructors;
   (D)   A copy of the course outline, schedule of tuition, fees and other
charges, regulations pertaining to tardiness and absence grading policy, and
rules of operation and conduct;
   (E)   A school of massage permit shall not be issued for the same location
as a massage/bodywork establishment.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord.
2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.12 VERIFICATION.
   Every application for a permit under this chapter shall be verified by
affidavit, declaration, or certification under penalty of perjury as provided
in the California Code of Civil Procedure.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08)
§ 119.13 REFERRAL TO OTHER DEPARTMENTS.
   (A)   Copies of an application for a massage establishment or school of
massage permit shall be referred to the Building Inspector, the Fire Marshal,
the Health Officer and the Police Chief, who shall review facility plans and
inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment.
   (B)   All other applications shall be referred to the Health Officer and the
Police Chief for their approval or written recommendations.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08)
REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS
§ 119.14 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT, GENERALLY.
   (A)   Facilities.
      (1)   Structure. Massage establishments shall be located in a zoning
district which permits such use. Prior to a proposed massage establishment
being constructed or opened for business, seven sets of plans shall be
submitted to the city and the Health Department for approval and shall be
accompanied by the appropriate non-refundable facility review plan fee as
adopted by city resolution.
      (2)   Signs; display of permits. Each operator shall post and maintain,
in compliance with existing state and city laws, a readable sign identifying
the premises as a massage establishment. The sign and the front of the business
shall not be illuminated by strobe or flashing lights. Each operator and/or on-
duty manager shall display the operator permit in a conspicuous public place in
the lobby of the massage establishment. Each operator and/or on-duty manager
shall ensure the CAMTC certificate for each massage practitioner employed at
the establishment (whether on duty or not) is conspicuously displayed in a
public place in the lobby, and that each massage practitioner is wearing the
required identification at all times when in the massage establishment. The
operator and/or on-duty manager must also post, on a daily basis in a
conspicuous public place in the lobby, the name of the operator and on-duty
manager, as well as all on-duty massage practitioners. Finally, the hours of
operation must be posted in the front window and clearly visible from the
outside.
      (3)   Services list. Each operator shall post and maintain a list of
available services, in bold letters not less than one inch in height, and the
cost of such services in a conspicuous public place within the premises. No
massage establishment may offer baths as a service. No operator or on-duty
manager shall permit, and no massage practitioner shall offer or perform, any
service or activity other than those posted. No sum shall be charged for such
massage services greater than that shown on the services list.
      (4)   Lighting. Each operator shall provide in each room where massage is
given sufficient lighting and ventilation that complies with the Uniform
Building Code. The lighting in each massage room shall be activated at all
times while the patron is in such room or enclosure.
      (5)   Restroom facilities. A minimum of one toilet and one separate wash
basin shall be provided for patrons in each massage establishment, which basin
shall provide soap or detergent and hot running water at all times and shall be
located within close proximity to the area devoted to massage services. A
permanently installed soap dispenser, filled with soap, and a single service
towel dispenser shall be provided at the restroom hand wash sink. No bar soap
may be used. A trash receptacle shall be provided in each toilet room. Showers
may be provided at the operator’s option.
      (6)   Separate rooms. If male and female patrons are to be treated
simultaneously, separate massage rooms shall be provided for male and female
patrons.
      (7)   Maintenance. All facilities for the massage establishment must be
in good repair and shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized each day the
business is in operation All walls, floors, and ceilings of each restroom and
shower area shall be made smooth and easily cleanable. No carpeting shall be
installed in any of these areas.
      (8)   Massage table. A massage table shall be provided in each massage
room and the massage shall be performed on this massage table, with the
exception of "Thai," "shiatsu," and similar forms of massage therapy, which may
be provided on a padded mat on the floor, provided the patron is fully attired
in loose clothing, pajamas, scrubs, or similar style of garment. The tables
should have a minimum height of 18 inches. Two-inch thick foam pads with
maximum width of four feet may be used on a massage table and shall be covered
with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material. Beds, floor
mattresses, and waterbeds are not permitted on the premises.
      (9)   Handicapped areas. Massage establishments shall comply with all
state and federal laws and regulations for handicapped customers.
      (10)   Doors. All front, reception, hallway, or front exterior doors
(except back or exterior doors used solely for employee entrance to and exit
from the massage establishment) shall be unlocked during business hours, except
as may be permitted by applicable law (such as the Uniform Fire Code) which
allow for safety doors which may be opened from the inside when locked. Massage
establishments may lock their external doors if the massage establishment is a
business entity owned by one individual with one or no employees or independent
contractors pursuant to Cal. Government Code § 51034(c)(6). No massage may be
given within any cubicle, room, enclosure, or any area within a massage
establishment which is fitted with a lock of any kind (such as a locking door
knob, padlock, dead bolt, sliding bar, or similar device), unless the only door
is an exterior door. All interior doors leading into massage rooms shall have
unobstructed windows.
   (B)   Operations.
      (1)   Equipment. Each operator and/or on-duty manager shall provide and
maintain on the premises adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing
instruments used in massage.
      (2)   Inspections. The operator and/or on-duty manager consents to the
inspection of the massage establishment by the city’s Building Department,
Police Department, and the Fire Department and Health Department for the
purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter or other applicable
laws or regulations are met.
         (a)   The city’s Building Department, Police Department, Fire
Department, and Health Department may, from time to time, make an inspection of
each massage establishment for the purpose of determining that the provisions
of this chapter, state law or other applicable laws or regulations are met.
Routine inspections shall not occur more than six times a year, unless
violations are found or complaints are received. Criminal investigations may be
conducted as directed by the Police Chief. The Police Department may inspect
the occupied massage rooms for the purpose of determining that the provisions
of this chapter are met upon occurrence of any of the conditions described in
division (B)(17) of this section which would require the posting of the notice
to all patrons. During an inspection, the Police Department may verify the
identity of all on-duty employees.
         (b)   Inspections of the massage establishment shall be conducted
during business hours.
         (c)   An operator or his or her agent, servant, or employee commits an
offense if he or she refuses to permit, impedes, or interferes with a lawful
inspection of the premises by a representative of the Police Department at any
time it is occupied or open for business.
      (3)   Clothing. All persons employed in the massage establishment shall
be fully clothed at all times while present at the massage establishment.
Clothing shall be of a fully opaque, non- transparent material and shall
provide complete covering of the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anal area, and
chest.
      (4)   Roster of employees. The operator and/or on-duty manager shall
maintain a register of all employees showing the full legal name, nicknames,
and aliases used by the employee, residential address, age, birth date, gender,
height, weight, color of hair and eyes, phone numbers, date of employment and
termination, if any, and duties of each employee. The above information on each
employee shall be maintained in the register on the premises for a period of
two years following termination. Operators shall maintain a register of all
therapists for review by local authorities that demonstrates all therapists
providing massage services are CAMTC certified. The operator and/or on-duty
manager shall make the register of employees available immediately for
inspection upon demand of representatives of the Police Department, City Code
Enforcement, or County Health Officer at all reasonable times.
      (5)   Linen. Common use of towels or linen shall not be permitted. Towels
and linen shall be laundered or changed promptly after each use. Separate
cabinets or containers shall be provided for the storage of clean and soiled
towels or linen.
      (6)   Living prohibited. No person or persons shall be allowed to live
inside the massage establishment at any time. All living quarters shall be
separate from the massage establishment. No food of any kind shall be prepared
for sale or sold in the establishment unless an appropriate food vending permit
is granted by the County of Stanislaus. No mattresses or other bedding are
allowed in the massage establishment or school of massage.
      (7)   Sleeping prohibited. No massage establishment or school of massage,
whether or not located in any building originally constructed for residential
or sleeping purposes, shall be used for residential or sleeping purposes.
      (8)   Alcoholic beverages/drugs. No person shall enter, be in or remain
in any part of a massage establishment licensed under this chapter while in
possession of, consuming, using or under the influence of any alcoholic
beverage or controlled substance. The operator and on-duty manager shall be
responsible to ensure that no such person shall enter or remain upon the
massage establishment. Service of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted.
      (9)   Recordings. No electrical, mechanical or artificial device shall be
used by the operator or any employee of the massage establishment for audio
and/or video recording or for monitoring the performance of a massage or the
conversation or other sounds in the massage rooms without the knowledge or
consent of the patron and the written permission of the Police Department.
      (10)   Coverings. Each massage establishment shall provide to all patrons
clean, sanitary and opaque coverings capable of covering the patrons specified
anatomical areas, including the genital area, anus and female breast(s). No
common use of such coverings shall be permitted, and re-use is prohibited
unless adequately cleaned.
      (11)   Records or treatment. The operator shall keep a record of the
dates and hours of each treatment or service, the first and last name and
address of the patron, the name of practitioner administering such service and
a description of the treatment or service rendered. A short medical history
form shall be completed by the patron to determine if the patron has any
communicable diseases, areas of pain, high blood pressure or any physical
condition which may be adversely affected by massage. These records shall be
prepared prior to administering any massage or treatment and shall be retained
for a period of 24 months after such treatment or service. These records shall
be open to inspection upon demand only by officials charged with enforcement of
this chapter and for no other purpose. The Police Department shall periodically
inspect the records to ensure compliance with this section. The information
furnished or secured as a result of any such records should be used only to
ensure and enforce compliance with this chapter or any other applicable state
or federal laws and shall remain confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or
use of such information by any officer or employee of the city shall constitute
a misdemeanor.
      (12)   Advertising. No massage establishment shall place, publish or
distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertising
matter that depicts any portion of the human body or employs text that would
reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any service is available other
than those services authorized by this chapter. No massage establishment shall
place, publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed,
any obscene advertising matter. It shall be unlawful to falsely state or
advertise, or put out any sign or card or other device, or falsely represent to
the public through any print or electronic media, that any person who is
employed or retained to perform massage therapy for compensation is a CAMTC
certified massage professional by use of the title "licensed," "certified,"
certified massage practitioner (CMP) or certified massage therapist (CMT), or
the use of any other term that implies or suggests that the person is currently
a CAMTC certified massage professional. It shall be unlawful to fail to include
the legal name under which any massage professional is certified and his or her
CAMTC certificate number in any advertising of massage therapy for
compensation. For the purposes of this section, pseudonyms are not sufficient.
It shall be unlawful to publish or distribute any advertising matter or
business identification card through any print or electronic media that are
classified as for adults only or similar classification. It shall be unlawful
to publish or distribute any advertising matter or business identification card
that is sexually suggestive or that would reasonably suggest that any service
is available other than a massage as defined in this chapter.
      (13)   Access. No person(s) other than CAMTC certificate holders,
permitted operators under this chapter and customers will be allowed anywhere
in the massage establishment other than the lobby/reception area during hours
of operation. Entry doors to any room shall not be obstructed by any means.
      (14)   Sexual paraphernalia. Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that
are designed for use in connection with sexual activities, including, but not
limited to, condoms, shall not be permitted within a massage establishment.
      (15)   Compliance. Massage establishments shall comply with all
applicable provisions of the Riverbank Municipal Code and Cal. Business and
Professions Code §§ 4600 et seq.
      (16)   Discrimination. No massage establishment may discriminate or
exclude patrons on the basis of their race, sex, religion, age, handicap, or
any other classification protected under federal or state laws, rules or
regulations.
      (17)   Notices. The Police Chief may require the notice below be posted
in all massage rooms on premise to ensure patrons are aware of the possibility
of an inspection, in the event that any employee of the massage establishment
or any person who has been aided and abetted by an employee of the massage
establishment has been found, after full hearing by administrative proceeding
or state court, to have violated any of the offenses listed in §§
119.08 and
119.10.
NOTICE TO ALL PATRONS
                                                                                                                             
THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE
PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY THE RIVERBANK POLICE SERVICES WITHOUT
PRIOR NOTICE.
                                                                                                                             
         (a)   The notice set forth above shall be prepared and issued by the
Police Chief.
         (b)   The notices shall be conspicuously posted in a location within
the massage establishment that are easily visible to any person entering the
premises and in each massage room. The notice shall be so posted for 12 months
following the violation of any of the offenses set forth above.
         (c)   The requirement for posting the notice described in this
division (17) is cumulative and in addition to all other remedies, violations
and penalties set forth in this chapter or in the ordinances, laws, rules or
regulations of the city, County of Stanislaus, and the State of California.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord.
2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.15 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT HOURS.
   No person shall conduct or operate a massage establishment or service
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08)
§ 119.16 CHANGES OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Every massage establishment operator shall report immediately to the
Police Department any and all changes of ownership or management of the massage
establishment or business, including, but not limited to, changes of manager or
other person principally in charge, stockholders holding more than 5% of the
stock of the corporation, officers, directors and partners, any and all changes
of name, style or designation under which the business is to be conducted and
all changes of address or telephone numbers of the massage business. A change
of location of any of the premises may be approved by the Police Chief,
provided there is compliance with all applicable regulations of the city.
   (B)   No massage practitioner permit or operator permit may be sold,
transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other
person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale,
transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of
such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void.
   (C)   If the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners
should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or
otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a
surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit, upon
notification to the Police Chief, shall be placed in the name of the surviving
partners.
   (D)   Upon the death or incapacity of a permittee, the massage establishment
may continue in business for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30
days, to allow for an orderly application of a new permit.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08)
§ 119.17 TRANSFER AND RENEWAL OF PERMITS.
   (A)   No permit issued hereunder shall be transferable to any other person
or establishment; provided, however, an additional location or change of
location of a massage practitioner permit will be allowed upon prior written
notice to the Police Chief and payment of the appropriate transfer fee.
   (B)   Renewal applications shall include such information as may be required
by the Police Chief to update the information contained in the original permit
application. The applicant shall accompany the application for renewal with the
appropriate filing fee.
   (C)   Permits for operators and employees shall be renewed on a year-to-year
basis, provided, that the permittee continues to meet the requirements set out
in this chapter.
   (D)   Applications for permit renewal shall be filed with the Police Chief
before the expiration of the existing permit. Temporary permits will not be
issued and renewal applications must be filed no later than 60 days prior to
the expiration of the permit to prevent a lapse of the permit.
(Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord. 2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.18 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The requirements of this chapter shall have no application and no
effect upon and shall not be construed as applying to any persons designated as
follows: state-licensed physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, physical
therapists, osteopaths, or any registered or licensed vocational nurse working
on the premises of, and under the direct supervision of, a state-licensed
physician, surgeon, chiropractor, or osteopath. Practical nurses or other
persons without qualifications as massage practitioners whether employed by
physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, or osteopaths or not, may not give massage
or massage procedures.
   (B)   Students enrolled at a recognized school of massage shall be exempt
from the requirements of this chapter; provided that such students perform
massage therapy only under the direct personal supervision of an instructor who
holds a valid CAMTC certificate as part of the curriculum.
   (C)   Commencing on the effective date of this chapter, all permits shall be
issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   An applicant for a reflexology exemption from this chapter that does
not hold themselves out to be a massage therapist, or do massage, massage
therapy, or other bodywork practices where licensing is required, shall present
evidence of the following minimum qualifications to the Chief of Police:
      (1)   Each applicant must be an individual, individually licensed and
insured;
      (2)   Be 18 years of age or older;
      (3)   Provide a copy of a certificate of attendance from a reflexology
program that meets industry standards of 100 hours of education taught by an
educator recognized by the National Council for Reflexology Educators (NCRE) as
a national board-certified reflexology educator;
      (4)   Evidence of satisfactory passage of the American Reflexology
Certification Board (ARCB) examination or another psychometrically valid
reflexology exam;
      (5)   Evidence of membership in good standing in the California state
professional association—the Reflexology Association of California or its
successor—that requires its members adhere to a code of ethics;
      (6)   Possession of practitioner liability insurance coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000;
      (7)   Provide a passport size photo I.D. with the application;
      (8)   If an applicant is not a United States citizen, provide evidence of
legal presence and employability in the United States;
      (9)   Provides background check and livescan finger printing; and
      (10)   Meets all appropriate zoning ordinances when conducting a home-
based business.
   (E)   Existing operator and massage practitioner permits shall continue in
effect until expiration. All existing permit holders shall have an additional
24-months from the effective date of this chapter to meet and comply with the
500-hour training requirement.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord.
2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.19 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, DENIAL AND APPEAL.
   (A)   Violation and noncompliance. The Police Chief may refuse to renew a
permit or may revoke or suspend an existing permit on the grounds that the
permit holder has failed to comply with the permit conditions or other
requirements of this chapter. If a suspended permit lapses during the
suspension period, a new application must be filed at the end of the suspension
period. In any such case, the permit holder shall have the right to appeal in
the time and manner set forth in this section.
   (B)   Revocation and suspension of operator permit.
      (1)   The Police Chief may revoke or refuse to renew a permit if he or
she makes any of the findings for denial of a permit under §
119.08(A), finds violation(s) of §
119.08(B)(1) or (B)(6), upon any subsequent violation of any provision within
one year following prior suspension under division (B)(2) of this section or
upon demonstrated inability to operate or manage the massage establishment in a
law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers.
      (2)   The Police Chief may suspend a permit for a period of 30 days for
each violation of §
119.08(B) not listed above, or §
119.15.
   (C)   Revocation and suspension of massage practitioner permit.
      (1)   The Police Chief may revoke or refuse to renew a massage
practitioner permit if he or she makes any of the findings for denial of a
permit under §
119.10(A), finds violation(s) of §
119.10(B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(6), or upon any subsequent violation of any
provision of this chapter within one year following a suspension under division
(C)(2) of this section;
      (2)   The Police Chief may suspend a massage practitioner permit for a
period of 30 days for each violation of §
119.10(B) not listed above, or §
119.15.
   (D)   Notice. When the Police Chief concludes that grounds for denial,
suspension, revocation or refusal to renew a permit exist, he or she shall
serve the applicant or permit holder, either personally or by certified mail
addressed to the business or residential address of applicant or permit holder,
with a notice of denial or notice of intent to suspend, revoke or refuse to
renew permit. This notice shall state the reasons for the proposed action, the
effective date of the decision, and the right of the applicant or permit holder
to appeal the decision to the City Council, and that the decision will be final
if no appeal is filed within the time permitted.
   (E)   Appeal.
      (1)   The right to appeal shall terminate upon the expiration of 15 days
from the date of mailing of the notice. The notice of appeal shall be filed
with the Police Department, along with the payment of any hearing fee which may
be established by City Council resolution. Any hearing fee shall not exceed the
reasonable cost to the city of a hearing.
      (2)   In the event an appeal is timely filed, the suspension or
revocation shall not be effective until a final decision has been rendered. If
no appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall become effective upon
expiration of the period for filing appeals.
      (3)   The City Manager shall appoint a neutral hearing officer in
consultation with the appellant to conduct the hearing, receive relevant
evidence and render a decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be
final. The appellant shall be entitled to notice of the basis for the proposed
action, a copy of the documents upon which the decision was based and the
opportunity to present contrary evidence at the hearing.
      (4)   Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be mailed
at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, by U.S. mail, with proof of
service attached, to the address listed on the application, or the address
given in the notice of appeal, if different.
      (5)   The following rules and evidence shall apply:
         (a)   Oral evidence shall be taken only under oath or affirmation. The
hearing officer shall have authority to administer oaths and to receive and
rule on admissibility of evidence;
         (b)   Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses,
introduce exhibits and cross-examine opposing witnesses who have testified
under direct examination. The hearing officer may call and examine any witness;
         (c)   Technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses shall not
apply to hearings provided for in this chapter. Any relevant evidence may be
admitted if it is material and is evidence customarily relied upon by
responsible persons in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence
of any common law or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence
improper over objection in civil actions. Hearsay testimony may be admissible
and used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any evidence given in
direct examination, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding
unless the testimony would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The
rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they are now or are
hereafter permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant collateral and undue and
repetitious testimony shall be excluded.
   (F)   No permit granted herein shall confer any vested right to any person
or business for more than the permit period. All operators, managers and
massage practitioner subject to this chapter shall comply with the provisions
of this chapter as they may be amended hereafter.
(Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord. 2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.20 ATTORNEY’S FEES AND COSTS.
   (A)   In any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding
commenced by the city to abate a public nuisance or to enjoin violation of any
provision of this chapter, if the city elects, at the initiation of that
individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees,
the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred therein,
including reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs of suit. In no action,
administrative proceeding or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys’
fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred by the city in the action or proceeding.
   (B)   The city shall be considered a prevailing party entitled to attorneys’
fees under division (A) of this section when it can demonstrate that:
      (1)   Its lawsuit was the catalyst motivating the defendant to provide
the primary relief sought;
      (2)   The lawsuit was meritorious and achieved its result by “threat of
victory”; and
      (3)   The city reasonably attempted to settle the litigation before
filing the lawsuit.
(Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08)
§ 119.21 PERSONS EMPLOYED UNDER AGE 18 NOT PERMITTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in
charge of any massage establishment or school of massage to employ any person
who is not at least 18 years of age.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08)
§ 119.22 PERSONS EMPLOYED WITHOUT PERMITS NOT ALLOWED.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner, operator, manager or
permittee in charge of a massage establishment or school of massage, to ensure
that each person employed shall first have obtained a valid CAMTC certificate.
   (B)   If knowingly employing any person who is not in possession of a valid,
unrevoked permit, or allowing such a person to work or practice within such a
place of business, the owner, operator, manager or permittee shall be in
violation of this section.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord.
2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.23 ON-SITE THERAPY AND OUT-CALL MASSAGE.
   (A)   No person shall perform or administer massage or bodywork techniques
as either on-site or out-call massage/bodywork, as those terms are defined
herein, for compensation without possessing a CAMTC certificate, a permit
issued by the Police Chief in accordance with this section and a valid city
business license.
   (B)   Out-call massage/bodywork shall not be performed by a physician,
surgeon, chiropractor, or osteopath duly licensed to practice in the state.
   (C)   Out-call massage and on-site therapy shall be conducted between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
   (D)   Out-call massage or on-site therapy shall not be conducted in the
following locations:
      (1)   A hotel/motel room or any other similar location used primarily for
transitory habitation purposes.
      (2)   The residence of the out-call or on-site massage/bodywork
practitioner.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord.
2024-004, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.24 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to
engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or
carried on, in or upon any premises, the business of massage/bodywork, or to
render or permit to be rendered massage or bodywork services at a location
removed from a massage/bodywork business, in the absence of a permit issued
pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Any massage/bodywork business operated, conducted or maintained
contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be unlawful and a public
nuisance; and the City Attorney may, at his or her discretion, in addition to
or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or
actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment
thereof, in any manner provided by law.
   (C)   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or failure to
comply with any of its mandatory requirements, shall constitute a misdemeanor;
except that, notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any such
violation constituting a misdemeanor under this chapter may, at the discretion
of the City Attorney, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction.
   (D)   (1)   Any violation of this chapter prosecuted as a misdemeanor shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment in the
county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both fine and
imprisonment.
      (2)   Any infraction prosecuted under the provisions of this chapter
shall be made punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (E)   Each person shall be charged with a separate offense for each and
every day during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall, upon conviction,
be punished accordingly.
   (F)   Pursuant to the City Attorney’s prosecutorial discretion, the city may
enforce violations of this chapter as criminal, civil and/or administrative
violations utilizing administrative remedies.
   (G)   It is the duty of the Police Chief to enforce rules and regulations in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-003, passed 3-13-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-10-08)
CHAPTER 120: CANNABIS REGULATIONS
General Provisions
   
120.01   Legislative intent
   
120.02   Cannabis definitions
   
120.03   All state and local licenses required
Regulations for Cultivation of Cannabis for Personal Use
   
120.10   Cultivation of cannabis for personal use: administrative cultivation
permit
   
120.11   Application for administrative cultivation permit
   
120.12   Regulations for administrative cultivation permit
   
120.13   Expiration and renewal of an administrative cultivation permit
   
120.14   Suspension and termination
   
120.15   Multiple administrative cultivation permit applications
Regulations for Commercial Cannabis Cultivation
   
120.20   Commercial cannabis cultivation
Regulations for Cannabis Testing Laboratories
   
120.30   Cannabis testing laboratory
Regulations for Cannabis Dispensaries
   
120.40   Cannabis dispensaries
Regulations for Cannabis Delivery
   
120.50   Cannabis delivery
Appeals and Enforcement
   
120.60   Permit appeals procedure
   
120.61   Penalties
   
120.62   Administrative penalty appeals procedure
   
120.63   Cost recovery
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 120.01 LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   It is the intent of the city to encourage responsible personal and
commercial cannabis activities and to discourage violations of related state
laws, especially those that prohibit the sale, use, or distribution of cannabis
and cannabis products to minors. It is not the intent of the city to expand,
reduce, or alter the penalties for violations of state cannabis laws.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17)
§ 120.02 CANNABIS DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   CANNABIS. Has the same meaning as that term is defined by Cal. Business and
Professions Code § 26001.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS. Any business engaged in commercial cannabis activity
including, but not limited to, a cannabis dispensary, and a cannabis testing
laboratory.
      (1)   CANNABIS BUSINESS shall not include any of the following, as long
as the location of such uses are otherwise regulated by this code or applicable
law including Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 1136.7 et seq.:
         (a)   A clinic licensed pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code
Division 2, Chapter 1.
         (b)   A residential care facility for persons with chronic life-
threatening illness licensed pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code Division
2, Chapter 3.01.
         (c)   A residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to
Cal. Health and Safety Code Division 2, Chapter 3.2.
         (d)   A residential hospice or a home health agency licensed pursuant
to Cal. Health and Safety Code Division 2, Chapter 8 and Chapter 8.5.
      (2)   CANNABIS BUSINESS as defined herein is not intended, nor shall it
be construed, to apply to the cultivation, delivery, gift, or furnishing of
cannabis by a qualified patient, a primary caregiver, or other person with an
identification card as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code §11362.7 provided
such activity complies strictly with all applicable state law, including but
not limited to, Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.5 and 11362.765.
   CANNABIS DELIVERY. Any cannabis business that, pursuant to a Type 10 or Type
12 state cannabis license, delivers, makes available, or distributes cannabis
and cannabis products to a consumer.
   CANNABIS DISPENSARY. Any physical location where medicinal or adult use
cannabis or cannabis products are sold at retail to customers pursuant to
Business and Professions Codes §§ 26000 et seq.
   CANNABIS FOR PERSONAL USE. The use or possession of cannabis that does not
require a license pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code §§ 26000 et
seq.
   CANNABIS TESTING LABORATORY. A laboratory licensed pursuant to Business and
Professions Codes §§ 26100 et seq. that meets the accreditation criteria in the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) guidelines known as ISO
17025. A Cannabis Testing Laboratory may test for cannabinoids, pesticides,
water activity (microbial growth), and other substances in cannabis and
cannabis products. A Cannabis Testing Laboratory may conduct other testing
unrelated to cannabis.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY. Includes the cultivation, manufacture,
distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling,
transportation, delivery, including industrial manufacturing activities, or
sale of cannabis or cannabis products that require a state license pursuant to
Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (Cal. Business and
Professions Code §§26000 et seq.).
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS WASTE. Cannabis plants and plant materials that are
discarded by a cannabis business, including but not limited to extra vegetative
plants, failed clones, and harvest waste. Said waste shall be documented,
shredded, blended 50/50 with shredded cardboard or paper, bagged up, and taken
to a transfer station/landfill. Any reuse or recycling of the shredded
materials for hemp paper or cloth shall be covered under a development
agreement or conditional use permit. This definition shall not apply to indoor
cultivation.
   CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting,
drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.
   CULTIVATION SITE. The location where cannabis is planted, grown, harvested,
dried, cured, graded, or trimmed, or a location where any combination of those
activities occur.
   DAY CARE. A facility, center, or home requiring a license that is issued by
the State of California which provides for the care, health, safety,
supervision, or guidance of a child’s social, emotional, and educational growth
on a regular basis, in a place other than the child’s own home, or any facility
meeting the definition of California Health and Safety Code §1596.76.
   GROUP HOME. Any community care facility regulated and licensed by a federal
or state agency. Unlicensed community care facilities or those community care
facilities the regulation of which is not otherwise preempted by state or
federal law shall not constitute group homes.
   INDOOR CULTIVATION. The cultivation of cannabis for personal use within a
fully enclosed and secure structure that has a complete roof in which cannabis
plants cannot be seen from any public right of way. Indoor cultivation does not
include any commercial cannabis activity.
   OUTDOOR CULTIVATION. The cultivation of cannabis that does not meet the
definition of indoor cultivation.
   PRIMARY CAREGIVER. Has the same meaning as that term is defined by Cal.
Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.7.
   QUALIFIED PATIENT. Has the same meaning as that term is defined by Cal.
Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.7.
   YOUTH CENTER. Any public or private facility that is primarily used to host
recreational or social activities for minors, including, but not limited to,
private youth membership organizations or clubs, social service teenage club
facilities, video arcades, or similar amusement park facilities.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17)
§ 120.03 ALL STATE AND LOCAL LICENSES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any cannabis business that does not have all applicable state licenses
is prohibited within the city.
   (B)   Any cannabis business allowed in the city shall be permitted pursuant
a development agreement, a city business license, a conditional use permit, or
a combination of the three, as set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   At the time of application to the city, every cannabis business
applicant shall submit to the Director of Community Development or his/her
designee a copy of its state license or state license application required for
its operation.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17)
REGULATIONS FOR CULTIVATION OF CANNABIS FOR PERSONAL USE
§ 120.10 CULTIVATION OF CANNABIS FOR PERSONAL USE: ADMINISTRATIVE CULTIVATION
PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cultivate cannabis outdoors for
personal use within the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cultivate cannabis for personal
use within a private residence without first having secured an Administrative
Cultivation Permit from the Community Development Department.
   (C)   A person shall be limited to a maximum of one Administrative
Cultivation Permit at a time.
   (D)   An Administrative Cultivation Permit is not transferable. The
Administrative Cultivation Permit shall only be used by the permittee to whom
it is issued.
   (E)   Administrative Cultivation Permit shall expire one year from the date
of approval and may be renewed annually.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17)
§ 120.11 APPLICATION FOR ADMINISTRATIVE CULTIVATION PERMIT.
   (A)   An applicant shall be at least 21 years of age.
   (B)   The Administrative Cultivation Permit application shall require all of
the following:
      (1)   Written consent signed by the legal property owner of the intended
cultivation.
      (2)   Identification of any chemicals, fertilizers, or pesticides that
will be used to cultivate plants to aid public safety officials in case of an
emergency response to the location.
   (C)   An applicant shall pay a nonrefundable Administrative Cultivation
Permit application fee as established by resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   Within 60 calendar days, the city will provide written notification of
the complete application to the applicant, indicating whether the application
has been approved or denied.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17)
§ 120.12 REGULATIONS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE CULTIVATION PERMIT.
   (A)   A private residence shall not include more than one cultivation site.
   (B)   A person shall not cultivate more than six living plants at a private
residence. All marijuana plants and anything produced by the plants shall be
kept within the permit holder’s private residence, or upon the grounds of that
private residence, and not be visible by normal unaided vision from a public
place.
   (C)   A private residence shall not also be used for a day care, youth
center, or group home. The private residence shall remain occupied and is
required to maintain a functioning kitchen, bathroom(s), and the use of the
two-car garage for their intended purposes.
   (D)   Each of the following shall apply to the cultivation site:
      (1)   The cultivation site shall be located within the private residence.
      (2)   To prevent safety hazards, the private residence shall not have
plumbing, electrical, or other utilities that violate applicable local or state
regulations. To prevent persons under 21 years of age from entering the
cultivation site, the cultivation site shall have lockable door(s).
      (3)   The cultivation site shall not produce odors, sounds, or other
emissions that are detectable by persons with reasonable sensitivity.
   (E)   All of the following shall be prohibited in the cultivation site:
      (1)   Volatile solvents including, but not limited to explosive gases,
such as Butane, Propane, Xylene, Styrene, Gasoline, Kerosene, 02 or H2.
      (2)   Dangerous poisons, toxins, or carcinogens, such as Methanol, Iso-
propyl Alcohol, Methylene Chloride, Acetone, Benzene, Toluene, and Trichloro-
ethylene, unless evidence of a current license to operate such solvents is
provided.
      (3)   Generators or gas products used to power electrical or lighting
fixtures or equipment.
   (F)   Not more than six living plants may be planted, cultivated, harvested,
dried, or processed within a single private residence at any one time.
   (G)   Each applicant shall pass an initial inspection of their cultivation
site by a city inspector to ensure that the private residence meets the
requirements of §
120.13 and does not pose a health or safety risk to the Applicant or public. If
the inspection is denied, the applicant will have ten calendar days to have the
cultivation site re-inspected.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17)
§ 120.13 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF AN ADMINISTRATIVE CULTIVATION PERMIT.
   (A)   An Administrative Cultivation Permit may be renewed no sooner than 60
days of expiration.
   (B)   The Administrative Cultivation Permit holder may be subject to a re-
inspection of the cultivation site by the city inspector upon 24 hours’ notice.
   (C)   Renewal of an Administrative Cultivation Permit is subject to a
renewal fee as approved by resolution by the City Council.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17)
§ 120.14 SUSPENSION AND TERMINATION.
   (A)   The city may suspend or terminate an Administrative Cultivation Permit
at any time for failure to comply with this chapter or state law or regulation.
   (B)   If a person’s Administrative Cultivation Permit is suspended,
terminated, or expired, the permit holder’s marijuana plants that exceed 28.5
grams may be assessed fines by the city until both of the following are met:
      (1)   The person reinstates their Administrative Cultivation Permit.
      (2)   The person pays an administration penalty pursuant to §
120.61 Penalties.
   (C)   A person may appeal any suspension or termination of an Administrative
Cultivation Permit pursuant to §
120.60.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17)
§ 120.15 MULTIPLE ADMINISTRATIVE CULTIVATION PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Application for Administrative Cultivation Permit in a new private
residence. An Administrative Cultivation Permit holder may apply for an
Administrative Cultivation Permit for a private residence other than the
private residence specified on the existing permit. If the application is
approved, the former Administrative Cultivation Permit shall be immediately
null and void. If the application is denied, the existing Administrative
Cultivation Permit shall continue under its applicable terms and conditions. If
the applicant appeals a denial of the application, the existing Administrative
Cultivation Permit shall continue under its applicable terms and conditions.
   (B)   Application for a Different Cultivation Site within the same private
residence. If a current Administrative Cultivation Permit holder applies for an
Administrative Cultivation Permit for the private residence on the existing
permit but for a cultivation site other than specified on the existing permit,
the existing permit will terminate upon approval of the application.
   (C)   Application for the Same Cultivation Site in same private residence.
      (1)   If an additional person applies for an Administrative Cultivation
Permit for the same cultivation site within the same private residence of a
current Administrative Cultivation Permit holder, a permit shall not be issued
if the existing permit has been terminated or suspended. If the Administrative
Cultivation Permit is approved for the additional applicant, the total number
of marijuana plants within a single private residence shall be limited to six.
In no event shall the number of marijuana plants exceed six.
      (2)   An additional Administrative Cultivation Permit for the same
cultivation site shall only be issued if all Administrative Cultivation Permits
related to that cultivation site are in good standing with the city.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17)
REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION
§ 120.20 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION.
   (A)   A commercial cannabis cultivation business may be permitted within the
city pursuant to a development agreement pursuant to California Government Code
§§65864 et seq., known as the Development Agreement Statute. The Development
Agreement shall include a Risk Management Plan.
   (B)   A commercial cannabis cultivation business shall only be allowed in a
Cannery District (CD), Industrial District (I), or Light Industrial (M-1)
zoning district.
   (C)   A commercial cannabis cultivation business shall not cultivate
outdoors anywhere within the city.
   (D)   All commercial cannabis cultivation businesses shall comply with all
of the following:
      (1)   Conditional Use Permit. Concurrently with applying for a
development agreement, the applicant shall obtain a conditional use permit
pursuant to §
153.216 Use Permit of the Riverbank Municipal Code. Information that may be
duplicative in the two applications can be incorporated by reference. The
conditional use permit shall run with the development agreement and not the
land.
      (2)   Secure building. All commercial cannabis activity shall occur
entirely inside of a building that is secure, locked, and fully enclosed, with
a ceiling, roof, or other enclosure. The building shall include a burglar alarm
monitored by an alarm company or private security company. The building,
including all walls, doors, and the roof, shall be of solid construction
meeting the minimum building code requirements for industrial structures
(including, without limitation, commercial greenhouse structures), and include
material strong enough to prevent entry except through an open door.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the roof may be of solid translucent material
provided other security measures exist to ensure that the cannabis operation
cannot be seen, heard or smelled beyond the property line.
      (3)   Security plan. A commercial cannabis cultivation business shall
comply with security requirements acceptable to the Police Chief on an
individual project basis. The security requirements will specify at a minimum
provisions for perimeter fencing plan, interior and exterior lighting plan,
security camera layouts, security team plan, alarm system details,
transportation, remote monitoring, electronic track and trace, fire suppression
plan, and record keeping.
      (4)   Insurance. A commercial cannabis cultivation business shall
maintain insurance in the amounts and of the types that are acceptable to the
City Manager or his or her designee. The city shall be named as additional
insured on all city-required insurance policies.
      (5)   Waste management plan. A commercial cannabis cultivation business
shall submit and comply with an approved commercial cannabis waste management
plan describing how cannabis waste will be documented, shredded, blended 50/50
with shredded cardboard or paper, bagged up, and taken to a transfer station/
landfill. Any reuse or recycling of the shredded materials for hemp paper and
cloth or other uses shall be addressed under a development agreement or
conditional use permit. If applicable, the plan shall include a description of
measures to be taken relating to light bulb recycling.
      (6)   Risk management plan. A commercial cannabis cultivation business
shall submit and comply with an approved risk management plan, which is used
for identifying, analyzing and responding to risk factors throughout the life
of the project. The risk management plan shall contain at a minimum these five
steps:
         (a)   Step 1 – An identification of the risks;
         (b)   Step 2 – An analysis of the risks;
         (c)   Step 3 – An evaluation or ranking of the risks;
         (d)   Step 4 – Recommended treatment for the risks; and
         (e)   Step 5 – Discussion of a method to monitor and review the risks.
      (7)   Signage. Signage informing the public of a commercial cannabis
cultivation business shall conform to the applicable zoning district
requirements and include one “green cross” logo, maximum four square feet in
size, lighted or unlighted, on the structure near the main entrance to each
building for wayfinding. If unlighted, the sign shall be reflective. The green
cross shall not count towards the maximum square footage of signage permitted
for the site nor restrict the use of green crosses on other signage.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17)
REGULATIONS FOR CANNABIS TESTING LABORATORIES
§ 120.30 CANNABIS TESTING LABORATORY.
   (A)   A cannabis testing laboratory may be permitted with a conditional use
permit pursuant to §
153.216 Use Permits.
   (B)   Cannabis testing laboratories shall only be located in a General
Commercial (C-2), Commercial-Industrial (CM), Downtown General (DG), Cannery
District (CD), or Research and Development (R&D) zoning districts.
   (C)   All cannabis testing laboratories shall obtain the proper state permit
(s), maintain a city business license, and maintain compliance with all of the
following:
      (1)   Standard operating procedures. All commercial cannabis activities
shall provide a copy of their state-required standard operating procedures.
      (2)   Secure building. All commercial cannabis activity shall occur
entirely inside of a building that is secure, locked, and fully enclosed, with
a ceiling, roof, or other enclosure. The building shall include a burglar alarm
monitored by an alarm company or private security company. The building,
including all walls, doors, and the roof, shall be of solid construction
meeting the minimum building code requirements for industrial structures and
include material strong enough to prevent entry except through an open door.
      (3)   Security plan. A cannabis testing laboratory shall comply with
security requirements acceptable to the Police Chief on an individual project
basis. The security requirements will specify at a minimum provisions for
perimeter fencing plan, interior and exterior lighting plan, security camera
layouts, security team plan, alarm system details, transportation, remote
monitoring, electronic track and trace, fire suppression plan, and record
keeping.
      (4)   Insurance. A cannabis testing laboratory shall maintain insurance
in the amounts and of the types that are acceptable to the City Manager or his
or her designee. The city shall be named as additional insured on all city-
required insurance policies.
      (5)   Waste management plan. A cannabis testing laboratory shall submit
and comply with an approved commercial cannabis waste management plan
describing how cannabis waste will be documented, shredded, blended 50/50 with
shredded cardboard or paper, bagged up, and taken to a transfer station/
landfill. Any reuse or recycling of the shredded materials for hemp paper and
cloth or other uses shall be addressed under the conditional use permit.
      (6)   Signage. Signage informing the public of a cannabis testing
laboratory shall conform to the applicable zoning district requirements and
include one “green cross” logo, maximum four square feet in size, lighted or
unlighted, on the structure near the main entrance to each building for
wayfinding. If unlighted, the sign shall be reflective. The green cross shall
not count towards the maximum square footage of signage permitted for the site
nor restrict the use of green crosses on other signage.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to cannabis testing laboratories
established pursuant to a development agreement and conditional use permit.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17)
REGULATIONS FOR CANNABIS DISPENSARIES
§ 120.40 CANNABIS DISPENSARIES.
   (A)   A cannabis dispensary may be permitted pursuant only to a development
agreement.
   (B)   Cannabis dispensaries shall only be located in a General Commercial
(C-2), Commercial-Industrial (CM), Cannery District (CD), Highway Boulevard
(HB), Downtown General (DG), Downtown Core (DC), Light Industrial (M-1) or
Research and Development (R&D) zoning district and at least 600 feet from a
school, day care facility, or youth center. Therefore it shall be prohibited
and no permit shall be issued in any other zoning district or planned
development zone.
   (C)   All cannabis dispensaries shall obtain any applicable state permit,
obtain a city business license, and maintain compliance with all of the
following:
      (1)   Security plan. A cannabis dispensary shall comply with security
requirements acceptable to the Police Chief on an individual project basis. The
security requirements will specify at a minimum provisions for perimeter
fencing plan, interior and exterior lighting plan, security camera layouts,
security team plan, alarm system details, transportation, remote monitoring,
electronic track and trace, fire suppression plan, and record keeping.
      (2)   Waste management plan. A cannabis dispensary shall submit and
comply with an approved commercial cannabis waste management plan describing
how cannabis waste will be documented, shredded, blended 50/50 with shredded
cardboard or paper, bagged up, and taken to a transfer station/landfill. Any
reuse or recycling of the shredded materials for hemp paper and cloth or other
uses shall be addressed under a development agreement or conditional use
permit. If applicable, the plan shall include a description of measures to be
taken relating to light bulb recycling.
      (3)   Risk management plan. A commercial cannabis dispensary shall submit
and comply with an approved risk management plan, which is used for
identifying, analyzing and responding to risk factors throughout the life of
the project. The risk management plan shall contain at a minimum these five
steps:
         (a)   Step 1 – An identification of the risks;
         (b)   Step 2 – An analysis of the risks;
         (c)   Step 3 – An evaluation or ranking of the risks;
         (d)   Step 4 – Recommended treatment for the risks; and
         (e)   Step 5 – Discussion of a method to monitor and review the risks.
      (4)   No loitering signage. A cannabis dispensary shall be posted with
“No Loitering” signage and enforce it pursuant to §
130.02 Loitering.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17)
REGULATIONS FOR CANNABIS DELIVERY
§ 120.50 CANNABIS DELIVERY.
   All cannabis delivery is prohibited within the city unless the cannabis
business obtains a city business license and maintains compliance with §
120.40 and §
110.19 Delivery by Vehicle.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17)
APPEALS AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 120.60 PERMIT APPEALS PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any permit applicant may appeal any adverse decision taken with
respect to a permit application under this chapter to the City Council.
   (B)   Appeals of adverse decisions related to permit applications must be
taken within 30 days after the adverse action by filing with the office of the
City Clerk a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. An appeal
shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee, as established by
resolution adopted by the City Council from time to time.
   (C)   The City Clerk, upon the filing of such appeal and payment of an
appeal fee, shall place the matter upon the agenda for the next regular meeting
of the City Council occurring not earlier than five days after the filing of
the appeal, and shall notify the appealing permit applicant by letter of the
meeting date and place at which the appeal will be heard.
(Ord. 2017-007, passed 8-22-17; Am. Ord. 2024-003, passed 8-27-24)
§ 120.61 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be, and hereby is declared to be, a public
nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure § 731 or any other remedy available to the city.
   (B)   In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this chapter, the
City Attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil
penalties against any person or entity that violates this chapter. In any civil
action brought pursuant to this chapter, a court of competent jurisdiction may
award reasonable attorney's fees and costs to the prevailing party.
   (C)   Violations of this chapter shall be subject to an administrative
penalty. The amount of the administrative penalty shall be $250 for the first
offense, $500 for the second offense, and $1,000 for any subsequent offense.
   (D)   In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this chapter,
violations of this chapter shall be subject to an administrative penalty. Any
responsible party violating any provision of this chapter may be issued an
administrative citation by a public official in accordance with this chapter.
The administrative citation penalty for each and every cannabis plant
cultivated in violation of this chapter shall be: (1) $1,000 per plant; plus
(2) $100 per plant per day that the plant remains uncorrected past the deadline
set forth in the administrative citation.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, the city may
immediately assess fines for violations of the city's building, plumbing,
electrical, or other similar structural, health and safety, or zoning
requirements if the violation exists as a result of or to facilitate, the
cultivation of cannabis, without first providing an opportunity to correct the
violation, unless any of the following are true:
      (1)   A tenant is in possession of the property that is the subject of
the administrative action;
      (2)   The rental property owner or agent can provide evidence that the
rental or lease agreement prohibits the cultivation of cannabis; or
      (3)   The rental property owner or agent did not know the tenant was
illegally cultivating cannabis and no complaint, property inspection, or other
information caused the rental property owner or agent to have actual notice of
the illegal cannabis cultivation.
   (F)   Each and every day a violation of the provisions of this chapter
exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense and shall be subject to
citation.
   (G)   Neither imposition nor payment of an administrative penalty shall
relieve the responsible party from their obligation to correct the violation,
nor shall it bar further enforcement action.
(Ord. 2020-009, passed 7-28-20)
§ 120.62 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY APPEALS PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Administrative penalties issued under this chapter may be appealed as
follows:
      (1)   Request for appeal hearing. Any person, corporation, entity, or
responsible party against whom administrative penalties have been assessed
under this chapter may appeal the violation and the issued administrative
citation penalty, administrative penalty, or administrative fines by filing a
written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 30 days of the date stated
on the citation or notice of violation, which shall be accompanied by a non-
refundable filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the City
Council. The appeal fee is intended to cover the costs, expenses, and city
employees' time incurred by the city in processing, preparing for, and hearing
the appeal.
      (2)   Deposit. Any person, corporation, entity, or responsible party
requesting a hearing under this section must pay a deposit to the city equal to
50% of the full amount of the penalty indicated on the notice of violation upon
submitting the hearing request with the city. Failure to deposit 50% of the
amount of all fines appealed within the 30 day filing period shall result in
the request for an appeal hearing being incomplete and untimely, and therefore
will not be accepted.
      (3)   Failure to timely file an appeal hearing request form with the City
Clerk, along with the filing fee and deposit, shall constitute a waiver of the
right to any appeal hearing, and the penalties stated on the administrative
citation or notice of violation shall be deemed confirmed and final.
      (4)   Hardship waiver. If within the 30-day filing period, the appealing
party establishes to the satisfaction of the Director of Finance or designee,
by means of tax returns, pay stubs or other similar documentary evidence, and
submits a declaration under penalty of perjury that paying the deposit amount
would cause undue financial hardship to the appealing party, the Director of
Finance or designee may grant a waiver or reduction of the deposit amount
required. The Director of Finance's determination is not appealable and shall
be final as to the hardship waiver request.
   (B)   Procedures for appeal hearings for administrative penalties under
Chapter 120.
      (1)   Hearing officer. For any appeal of administrative penalties
assessed or otherwise imposed under this chapter, the appeal shall be heard by
a neutral hearing officer.
         (a)   The City Manager is authorized to develop policies and
procedures relating to the qualification, disqualification and appointment of
hearing officers, hearing officer powers, hearing procedures, scope of the
hearing, and other matters relating to administrative appeal hearings. Any
person designated to serve as a hearing officer is subject to disqualification
for bias, prejudice, a conflict of interest or for any other reason for which a
judge may be disqualified in a court of law.
         (b)   The City Council or City Manager shall appoint independent
hearing officers for administrative appeal hearings or contract with an
organization that provides independent hearing officers.
      (2)   Notice. The person, business, entity, or responsible party
requesting the appeal hearing under this section shall be notified by the City
Clerk of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten business days
prior to the date of the hearing.
      (3)   Conduct of appeal hearing.
         (a)   Testimony at the hearing. At the time set for the appeal
hearing, the hearing officer shall proceed to hear testimony from the
representative of the city, the appellant, and any other competent persons with
respect to the determination of a violation and nuisance or the imposition of
an administrative penalty.
         (b)   Record of oral evidence at hearing. The proceedings at the
hearing shall be reported by a tape recording. Either party may provide a
certified shorthand reporter to maintain a record of the proceedings at the
requesting party's own expense.
         (c)   Continuances. The hearing officer may, upon request by the
person, corporation, or entity against whom a penalty is to be imposed, or upon
request of the city, grant continuances from time to time for extreme or
unusual cause shown, or upon the hearing officer's own motion.
         (d)   Oaths; certification. The hearing officer or certified shorthand
reporter shall administer the oath or affirmation.
         (e)   Evidence rules. Cal. Gov't Code § 11513(a), (b), and (c) shall
apply to all administrative hearings. At the hearing officer's sole discretion,
other relevant evidence may be admissible and hearsay evidence may be used for
the purpose of supplementing and explaining other evidence.
         (f)   Burden of proof. The accuracy of the notice and order containing
the description of the violations or public nuisance and the actions required
to abate such violation or nuisance is deemed a rebuttable presumption and the
burden is on the appellant to provide such facts and information to overcome
such presumption by a preponderance of the evidence.
      (4)   Rights of parties.
         (a)   Each party shall have the following rights among others: to call
and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; to
introduce documentary and physical evidence; to cross-examine opposing
witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; to impeach any
witness regardless of which party first called that witness to testify; to
rebut the evidence against him or her; and to represent himself or herself or
to be represented by anyone of his or her choice.
         (b)   If a party does not proficiently speak or understand the English
language, that party may provide an interpreter, at that party's own cost, to
translate for the party. An interpreter shall not have been a resident of the
premises or have had any personal relationship with or involvement in the
parties or issues of the case prior to the hearing.
      (5)   Official notice. In reaching a decision, the hearing officer may
take official notice, either before or after submission of the case for
decision, of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this
state, or which may appear in any of the official records of the city or
Stanislaus County or any of their departments.
      (6)   Hearing officer's decision. Within 30 days of the hearing, the
hearing officer shall serve a written order stating the decision made and the
reasons for the decision. The order shall become final on the date of service
of the order, and a copy shall be served on the appellant by first class mail
to the address provided by appellant in the written notice of appeal, and on
the City Clerk by first class mail.
      (7)   Right to judicial review.
         (a)   The failure of the person, corporation, entity, or responsible
party contesting the administrative penalty under this section to appear at the
appeal hearing shall result in a forfeiture of the right to appeal the
administrative penalty and shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative
remedies.
         (b)   Subject to the above provisions of division (B)(7)(a) above, any
person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a hearing officer on an
administrative penalty may obtain review of the administrative decision by
filing an appeal in a court of competent jurisdiction within 20 days after
service of the decision in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §
53069.4(b).
(Ord. 2024-003, passed 8-27-24)
§ 120.63 COST RECOVERY.
   (A)   The city shall be entitled to recover its abatement and enforcement
costs incurred in obtaining compliance with this chapter. Costs incurred by the
city are recoverable even if a public nuisance, Municipal Code, or other
violation of law is corrected by the property owner or other responsible party.
   (B)   The cost of abating a public nuisance or enforcing this chapter shall
either be a special assessment and lien on the subject property or the personal
obligation of the owner of the subject property or the responsible party. If
there is more than one responsible party, each party shall be jointly and
severally liable for the costs.
   (C)   For purposes of this chapter, the following additional definitions
shall apply:
      (1)   ABATEMENT COSTS include the actual and reasonable costs incurred by
the city to abate a public nuisance. These costs include all direct and
indirect costs to the city that result from the total abatement action,
including but not limited to, investigation costs, costs to enforce the
Municipal Code and any applicable state or county law, clerical and
administrative costs to process paperwork, costs incurred to provide notices
and prepare for and conduct administrative appeal hearings, and costs to
conduct actual abatement of the nuisance. Costs include personnel costs,
administrative overhead, costs for equipment such as cameras and vehicles,
staff time to hire a contractor, and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
city.
      (2)   ENFORCEMENT COSTS include all actual and reasonable costs incurred
by the city to enforce compliance with the Municipal Code and any applicable
state, county, or city public health and safety law that are not included
within abatement costs. Enforcement costs shall also include, but are not
limited to, costs of fringe benefits for personnel, administrative overhead,
costs of equipment, costs of materials, costs related to investigations, costs
related to issuing and defending administrative or court citations, costs
incurred investigating and abating violations of the Municipal Code or state or
county law violations, and reasonable attorneys' fees related to these
activities.
      (3)   RESPONSIBLE PARTY means a person or entity responsible for
creating, causing, committing, contributing to, or maintaining the violation of
this chapter or state or county law, or any person or entity that owns,
occupies, leases, manages, or maintains the property on which the violation has
taken place.
      (4)   SUBJECT PROPERTY means the real property that is the subject of any
abatement or enforcement action by the city for which the city incurred costs
and seeks recovery under this chapter.
   (D)   In any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to
abate a nuisance under this chapter, the prevailing party shall be entitled to
recover attorneys' fees. Recovery of attorneys' fees by the prevailing party
may be limited to individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects,
at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of
its own attorneys' fees. In no action, administrative proceeding, or special
proceeding, shall an award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party exceed the
amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in the action or
proceeding.
(Ord. 2024-003, passed 8-27-24)
CHAPTER 121: MOBILEHOME SPACE RENT STABILIZATION
Section
   
121.01   Purpose
   
121.02   Definitions
   
121.03   Applicability of this chapter
   
121.04   Exemptions from this chapter
   
121.05   Permissible rent increases
   
121.06   Automatic annual increases based on increases in the Consumer Price
Index
   
121.07   Rent increases in order to obtain a fair return
   
121.08   Procedures for reviewing petitions for fair return rent adjustments
   
121.09   Rent increases for new capital improvements
   
121.10   Rent reductions for service reductions
   
121.11   Waivers
   
121.12   Information to be supplied by the park owner to tenants and
prospective tenants
   
121.13   Information to be provided by the city to mobilehome owners and the
public
   
121.14   Resident representatives
   
121.15   Rights of prospective tenants
   
121.16   Initial registration, annual registration, and other notices required
from owner
   
121.17   Retaliation prohibited
   
121.18   Excessive rents or demands therefore
   
121.19   Excessive rents - civil penalties
   
121.20   Rules and guidelines
   
121.21   Authority of City Council to bring civil action to compel compliance
   
Appendix A: Rental Agreement Notice
§ 121.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to:
   (A)   Prevent excessive and unreasonable rent increases to mobilehome park
residents.
   (B)   Prevent exploitation of the shortage of available mobilehome lots in
the city and neighboring areas.
   (C)   Enable mobilehome owners to preserve their equity in their
mobilehomes.
   (D)   Permit mobilehome park owners to receive a fair return.
   (E)   Help preserve affordable space rents within the city.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSUMER PRICE INDEX. The Consumer Price Index All-items Western region for
all urban consumers as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United
States Department of Labor.
   IN-PLACE TRANSFER. The transfer of the ownership of a mobilehome with the
mobilehome remaining on the mobilehome lot following the transfer.
   LANDLORD. A mobilehome park owner, mobilehome owner, lessor or sublessor who
receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use and occupancy of any rental
unit or portion thereof, and the agent, representative or successor of any of
the foregoing.
   MOBILEHOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, designed and
equipped to contain not more than one dwelling unit, to be used with or without
a foundation system.
   MOBILEHOME PARK. Any area or tract of land where two or more mobilehome lots
are rented or leased, or held out for rent or lease, to accommodate mobilehomes
used for human habitation for permanent, as opposed to transient, occupancy.
   RENT. Any consideration, including any bonus, benefit or gratuity, demanded
or received by a landlord for or in connection with the use or occupancy,
including housing services, of a rental unit or in connection with the
assignment of a lease or in connection with subleasing of the rental unit. RENT
shall not include utility charges for charges for sub-metered gas and
electricity. RENT shall not include charges for water, refuse disposal, sewer
service, and/or other services which are provided and charged to mobilehome
residents solely on a cost pass-through basis. RENT shall not include any
amount paid for the use and occupancy of a mobilehome unit (as opposed to
amounts paid for the use and occupancy of a mobilehome space.)
   RENT INCREASE. Any rent demanded of or paid by a mobilehome owner or
mobilehome tenant in excess of rent paid for the rental unit immediately prior
to such demand or payment. RENT INCREASE includes any reduction in the services
provided to a mobilehome resident or transfer of the cost without a
corresponding reduction in the moneys demanded for or paid as rent.
   RENTAL AGREEMENT. A written agreement between a landlord and a mobilehome
owner or mobilehome tenant for the use and occupancy of a rental unit to the
exclusion of others.
   RENTAL UNIT. A mobilehome or mobilehome lot, located in a mobilehome park in
the City of Citrus Heights which is offered or available for rent. RENTAL UNIT
includes the land, with or without
a mobilehome, and appurtenant buildings thereto and all housing services,
privileges and facilities supplied in connection with the use or occupancy of
the mobilehome or mobilehome lot.
   SERVICE REDUCTION. A decrease or diminution in the basic service level
provided by the park since July, 2008 including, but not limited to services
the park owner is required to provide pursuant to:
      (1)   California Civil Code §§ 1941.1 and 1941.2.
      (2)   The Mobilehome Residency Law, California Civil Code §§ 798 et seq.
      (3)   The Mobilehome Parks Act, Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 18200 et
seq.
      (4)   The landlord's implied warranty of habitability.
      (5)   An express or implied agreement between the landlord and the
resident.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.03 APPLICABILITY OF THIS CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall be applicable to all mobilehome park spaces within the
city except as provided in §
121.04.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.04 EXEMPTIONS FROM THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   Exemptions provided by state law.
      (1)   As of September 2008, the following exemptions from local rent
regulations are provided by state law:
         (a)   Spaces that are subject to a lease which exempts that space from
rent regulation pursuant to the California Mobilehome Residency Law, California
Civil Code §§ 798 et seq.
         (b)   Newly constructed spaces, which are exempted pursuant to
California Civil Code § 798.45.
         (c)   Spaces which are exempt pursuant to California Civil Code §
798.21 (which exempts spaces which are not the principle residence of the
mobilehome owner.)
      (2)   The purpose of this section is to provide information, rather than
set forth regulations under this chapter.
   (B)   Units owned or operated by government agencies. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to mobilehomes or mobilehome parks owned or operated by
any governmental agency or any rental unit whose rent is subsidized pursuant to
a public program that limits the rent that can be charged for the mobilehome.
   (C)   Mobilehome parks with less than ten spaces. This chapter shall not be
applicable to spaces in mobilehome parks with less than ten spaces.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.05 PERMISSIBLE RENT INCREASES.
   No rent in excess of rent in effect on July 1, 2008 may be charged unless
authorized by §§
121.06,
121.07 or
121.09.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.06 AUTOMATIC ANNUAL INCREASES BASED ON INCREASES IN THE CONSUMER PRICE
INDEX.
   (A)   Annual rent increases starting in 2009. Starting in 2009, on or after
May 1 of each year, the rent may be increased over the allowable rent as of May
1 of the prior year adjusted by 100% of the percentage increase in the CPI last
reported as of January 1 in the current year over the CPI last reported as of
January 1 in the prior year. The percentage amount of said increase shall be
rounded to nearest one-quarter of one percent. However, in 2009, the rent may
not be increased over the rent in effect as of January 1, 2005, by a percentage
that exceeds the percentage increase in the CPI from January 1, 2005 to the
date of the notice of the increase.
   (B)   Notice of annual allowable rent increase.
      (1)   Notice by City Manager. The allowable annual rent increase shall be
annually calculated by the City Manger and posted by January 10 of each year in
City Hall and on the city's website, and mailed to each park owner and to the
mobilehome owner representative in each park.
      (2)   Notice in mobilehome parks. A copy of the clerk's notice shall be
posted in a prominent place in each mobilehome park within three work days
after it is received by the park owner.
   (C)   No decrease if CPI decreases. In the event that the CPI decreases, no
rent decrease shall be required pursuant to this section.
   (D)   Banking of allowable annual increases. Increases authorized pursuant
to this section may be implemented by the landlord at any future time, subject
to the precondition that the park owner notify the mobilehome owner of each
authorization of a rent increase pursuant to this section and annually notify
the mobilehome owner that the increase may be added to the rent at a future
date.
   (E)   Compliance with state law. Rent increases permitted pursuant to this
section shall not be effective and shall not be demanded, accepted, or retained
until the landlord has given the notice required by state law.
   (F)   No increases upon in-place sales of mobilehomes. The maximum rent
which may be charged pursuant to this chapter shall not be modified upon the
sale, transfer, or rental of the mobilehome to a third party, or by the
replacement of the mobilehome by the homeowner.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.07 RENT INCREASES IN ORDER TO OBTAIN A FAIR RETURN.
   A park owner may petition for a rent increase in order to obtain a fair
return.
   (A)   Presumption of fair base year net operating income. It shall be
presumed that the net operating income received by the landlord in the base
year provided the park owner with a fair return.
   (B)   Fair return. A park owner has the right to obtain a net operating
income equal to the base year net operating income adjusted by 100% of the
percentage increase in the CPI since the base year. The base year CPI shall be
the annual average CPI for 2005 (base period = 1996). The current year CPI
shall be the annual average CPI for the calendar year which is used as the
current year in the application.
   (C)   Base year.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, base year means
the 2005 calendar year.
      (2)   In the event that a determination of the allowable rent is made
pursuant to this section, if a subsequent petition is filed the base year shall
be the year that was considered as the "current year" in the prior petition.
   (D)   Current year. The current year shall be the calendar year that
precedes the year in which the application is filed.
   (E)   Adjustment of base year net operating income. The park owner or
mobilehome owners may present evidence to rebut the presumption of fair return
based upon the base year net operating income as set forth in division (A) of
this section based on at least one of the following findings:
      (1)   Exceptional expenses in the base year. The park owner's operating
expenses in the base year were unusually high or low in comparison to other
years. In such instances, adjustments may be made in calculating operating
expenses so the base year operating expenses reflect average expenses for the
property over a reasonable period of time. The following factors shall be
considered in making such a finding.
         (a)   Extraordinary amounts were expended for necessary maintenance
and repairs.
         (b)   Maintenance and repair was below accepted standards so as to
cause significant deterioration in the quality of services provided.
         (c)   Other expenses were unreasonably high or low notwithstanding the
application of prudent business practices.
      (2)   Exceptionally low rent in the base year. The gross income during
the base year was disproportionately low due to exceptional circumstances. In
such instances, adjustments may be made in calculating base year gross rental
income consistent with the purposes of this chapter. The following factors
shall be considered in making such a finding:
         (a)   If the gross income during the base year was lower than it might
have been because some residents were charged reduced rent.
         (b)   If the gross income during the base year was significantly lower
than normal because of the destruction of the premises and/or temporary
eviction for construction or repairs.
         (c)   The pattern of rent increases in the years prior to the base
year and whether those increases reflected increases in the CPI.
         (d)   The base year rents were exceptionally low compared to the rents
for spaces in comparable parks in the Modesto area.
         (e)   Other exceptional circumstances.
   (F)   Calculation of net operating income.
      (1)   Net operating income. Net operating income shall be calculated by
subtracting operating expenses from gross rental income.
      (2)   Gross rental income.
         (a)   Gross rental income shall include:
            1.   Gross rents calculated as gross rental income at 100%
occupancy, adjusted for uncollected rents due to vacancy and bad debts to the
extent such are beyond the control of the landlord. Uncollected space rents in
excess of 3% of gross space rent shall be presumed to be unreasonable unless
established otherwise and shall not be included in computing gross income.
            2.   All other income or consideration received or receivable in
connection with the use or occupancy of the rental unit.
         (b)   Gross rental income shall not include:
            1.   Income which constitutes reimbursement for utilities provided
by the park owner.
            2.   Income associated with provision of utility services when the
charges for the utility service are preempted by state and consideration of
said income is preempted by state law. (As of the date of the adoption of this
chapter state law regulates and preempts consideration of income and expenses
associated with the provision of sub-metered gas and electricity. Consideration
of gas and electricity income and expenses for common area services is not
preempted by state law.)
      (3)   Operating expenses.
         (a)   Included in operating expenses. Operating expenses shall include
the following:
            1.   Reasonable costs of operation and maintenance.
            2.   Management expenses. It shall be presumed that management
expenses have increased by the percentage increase in rents or in the CPI,
whichever is greater, between the base year and the current year unless the
level of management services has either increased or decreased between the base
year and the current year.
            3.   Utility costs. Utility costs except utility where the
consideration of the income associated with the provision of the utility
service is regulated by state law and consideration of the costs associated
with the provision of the utility service is preempted by state law.
            4.   Real property taxes. Property taxes are an allowable expense,
subject to the limitation that property taxes attributable to an assessment in
a year other than the base year or current year shall not have been considered
in calculating base year and/or current year operating expenses.
            5.   License and registration fees. License and registration fees
required by law to the extent these expenses are not otherwise paid or
reimbursed by tenants.
            6.   Landlord-performed labor. Landlord-performed labor compensated
at reasonable hourly rates.
               a.   No landlord-performed labor shall be included as an
operating expense unless the landlord submits documentation showing the date,
time and nature of the work performed.
               b.   There shall be a maximum allowed under this provision of 5%
of gross income unless the landlord shows greater services were performed for
the benefit of the residents.
            7.   Costs of capital replacements. Costs of capital replacements
plus an interest allowance to cover the amortization of those costs where all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The capital improvement is made at a direct cost of not
less than $100 per affected rental unit or at a total direct cost of not less
than $5,000, whichever is lower.
               b.   The costs, less any insurance proceeds or other applicable
recovery, are averaged on a per unit basis for each rental unit actually
benefitted by the improvement.
               c.   The costs are amortized over a period of not less than 36
months.
               d.   The costs do not include any additional costs incurred for
property damage or deterioration that result from any unreasonable delay in
undertaking or completing any repair or improvement.
               e.   The costs do not include costs incurred to bring the rental
unit into compliance with a provision of the Riverbank Municipal Code or state
law where the original installation of the improvement was not in compliance
with code requirements.
               f.   At the end of the amortization period, the allowable
monthly rent is decreased by any amount it was increased because of the
application of this provision.
               g.   The amortization period shall be in conformance with a
schedule adopted by the City Manager unless it is determined that an alternate
period is justified based on the evidence presented in the hearing.
            8.   Legal expenses. Attorneys' fees and costs incurred in
connection with successful good faith attempts to recover rents owing,
successful good faith unlawful detainer actions not in derogation of applicable
law, and legal expenses necessarily incurred in dealings with respect to the
normal operation of the park to the extent such expenses are not recovered from
adverse or other parties, subject to the following requirements:
               a.   Reasonable fees, expenses, and other costs incurred in the
course of successfully pursuing rights under or in relationship to this chapter
and regulations adopted pursuant to the chapter including costs incurred in the
course of pursuing successful fair return petitions. Said expenses shall be
amortized over a five year period, unless the Hearing Officer concludes that a
differing period is more reasonable.
               b.   Allowable legal expenses which are not of a nature that
recurs annually shall be amortized over a reasonable period of time. At the end
of the amortization period, the allowable monthly rent shall be decreased by
any amount it was increased because of the application of this provision.
            9.   Interest allowance for expenses that are amortized. An
interest allowance shall be allowed on the cost of amortized expenses; the
allowance shall be the interest rate on the cost of the amortized expense equal
to the "average rate" for 30 year fixed rate on home mortgages plus 1%. The
"average rate" shall be the rate Freddie Mac last published in its weekly
Primary Mortgage Market Survey (PMMS) as of the date of the initial submission
of the petition.
         (b)   Exclusions from operating expenses. Operating expenses shall not
include the following:
            1.   Mortgage principal or interest payments or other debt service
costs.
            2.   Any penalties, fees or interest assessed or awarded for
violation of any provision of this chapter or of any other provision of law.
            3.   Land lease expenses.
            4.   Political contributions.
            5.   Depreciation.
            6.   Any expenses for which the landlord has been reimbursed by any
utility rebate or discount, security deposit, insurance settlement, judgment
for damages, settlement or any other method or device.
            7.   Unreasonable expense increases since the base year.
            8.   Expenses associated with the provision of master-metered gas
and electricity services.
            9.   Expenses incurred as a result of unreasonable delays in
performing necessary maintenance or repair work or the failure to complete
necessary replacements.
         (c)   Adjustments of operating expenses. Base year and/or current
operating expenses may be averaged with other expense levels for other years or
amortized or adjusted by the CPI or may otherwise be adjusted, in order to
establish an expense amount for that item which most reasonably serves the
objectives of obtaining a reasonable comparison of base year and current year
expenses. Grounds for such adjustments include, but are not limited to:
            1.   An expense item for a particular year is not representative;
            2.   The base year expense is not a reasonable projection of
average past expenditures for that item in the years immediately preceding or
following the base year;
            3.   The current year expense is not a reasonable projection of
future expenditures of that item;
            4.   A particular expense exceeds the normal industry or other
comparable standard for the area, the park owner shall bear the burden of
proving the reasonableness of the expense. To the extent that it is found that
the expense is unreasonable it may be adjusted to reflect the normal industry
standard; or
            5.   A base year expense is exceptionally low by industry standards
and relative to current year expenses although the level or type of service has
not changed significantly.
   (G)   Assurance of a fair return. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this chapter, nothing shall preclude the hearing officer and the City Council
from granting an increase that is necessary in order to meet constitutional
fair return requirements and to take into account factors which a court directs
the city to consider in a fair return hearing.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.08 PROCEDURES FOR REVIEWING PETITIONS FOR FAIR RETURN RENT ADJUSTMENTS.
   Procedures for petitions for individual park rent adjustments.
   (A)   Right to petition. No petition for a fair return rent adjustment may
be filed pursuant to this chapter until 30 days after this chapter goes into
effect.
   (B)   Limit on frequency of petitions. Only one petition pursuant to this
section may be filed for a mobilehome park within a 12 month period. An
exception to this limitation shall be authorized in the event of extraordinary
circumstances that could not reasonably have been foreseen at the time the
prior petition was filed.
   (C)   Petition form required. Such petition shall be on a form prescribed by
the City Manager.
   (D)   Petition fee. Upon the receipt of a fair rate of return application,
the City Manager shall determine if the employment of experts will be necessary
or appropriate for a proper analysis of the applicant's presentation. If the
City Manager so determines, it shall also determine the anticipated cost of
employing any such experts. The resulting figure shall be communicated to the
applicant. The application shall not be further processed until the applicant
has paid to the city the estimated cost of expert analysis. Any unused portion
of the advance payment for expert analysis shall be refunded to the applicant.
   (E)   Contents of petition form. The form may require any information deemed
relevant by the administrator. The form shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of all mobilehome owners and
mobilehome tenants subject to the rent increase.
      (2)   A statement of the date the rent increase is proposed to be
effective.
      (3)   The rent for each space in the park in the base year, the current
year, the three prior years.
      (4)   An income and expense statement for the base year, the current
year, and the three prior years.
      (5)   Evidence documenting the income and expenses claimed by the park
owner.
      (6)   All other documentation upon which the park owner is relying on to
justify the rent increase.
   (F)   Determination that the petition is complete. The City Manager will
determine if the petition is complete within 30 days after the petition is
submitted. If the application is incomplete, the City Manager will also inform
the petitioner as to what additional information is required.
   (G)   Access to the petition. The documentation required by this section
shall be available for inspection and copying by any person during the normal
business hours of the city. The city shall make a copy of all submissions by
the park owner and the residents in conjunction with a petition that shall be
available in the form of an electronic PDF file.
   (H)   Time of hearing.
      (1)   A hearing officer shall commence an administrative hearing on the
petition within not less than 60 nor more than 90 days of the date the park
owner's petition is deemed complete. The hearing shall be completed within 15
days after it is commenced. These time deadlines may be extended if the hearing
officer finds that there is good cause to commence and/or complete the hearing
at a later date.
      (2)   The hearing may be scheduled during the normal business hours of
the city unless the park owner or a majority of the residents that are subject
to the petition request that the hearing be scheduled during the evening. The
hearing shall be scheduled at a time that it is convenient for the residents'
and park owners' representatives.
      (3)   The presentations of each party at the hearing and of the city
staff and experts shall be limited to three hours each unless the hearing
officer finds that there is good cause for providing a greater period of time.
   (I)   Notice of hearing. Written notice of the time, date and place of the
administrative hearing shall be given at least 30 days prior to the hearing.
   (J)   Requests for additional information by opposing party.
      (1)   Either party may request that additional specific supporting
documentation be provided to substantiate the claims made by the other party.
The request shall be presented in writing to the hearing officer.
      (2)   The hearing officer may order production of such requested
documentation, if the hearing officer determines the information is relevant to
the proceedings.
   (K)   Submission of reports.
      (1)   If an analysis of the rent increase application is prepared by the
residents it shall be submitted to the city and to the applicant at least 14
days prior to the hearing. (The applicant shall supply the residents an
electronic address for said submission.)
      (2)   If an analysis of the rent increase application is prepared by the
city staff and/or a consultant on behalf of the city, it shall be submitted to
the parties at least 14 days prior to the hearing.
      (3)   Rebuttal reports may be submitted by the park owner and/or
residents seven days prior to a hearing.
   (L)   Conduct of hearing.
      (1)   The hearing shall be conducted by hearing officer in accordance
with such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the City Council and
any rules set forth by the hearing officer.
      (2)   The hearing officer shall have the power and authority to require
and administer oaths or affirmations where appropriate, and to take and hear
evidence concerning any matter pending before the hearing officer.
      (3)   The rules of evidence generally applicable in the courts shall not
be binding on the hearing officer. Hearsay evidence and any and all other
evidence which the hearing officer deems relevant and proper may be admitted
and considered.
      (4)   Any party or such party's representative, designated in writing by
the party, may appear at the hearing to offer such documents, oral testimony,
written declaration or other evidence as may be relevant to the proceedings.
      (5)   The hearing officer may grant or order not more than two
continuances of the hearing for not more than ten working days each. Additional
continuances may be granted only if all parties stipulate in writing or if the
hearing officer finds that there is a good cause for the continuance. Such
continuances may be granted or ordered at the hearing without further written
notice to the parties.
      (6)   A tape recording of the proceedings shall be made by the City
Manager.
      (7)   The hearing shall be conducted in a manner that insures that
parties have an opportunity to obtain documents and to obtain information about
the theories and facts to be presented by the opposing parties an adequate time
in advance of the hearing to enable preparation of a rebuttal.
   (M)   Representation of parties.
      (1)   The parties in any hearing may be represented at the hearings by a
person of the party's choosing. The representative need not be an attorney.
      (2)   Written designation of representatives shall be filed by the City
Manager.
      (3)   The written designation of the representative shall include a
statement that the representative is authorized to bind the party to any
stipulation, decision or other action taken at the administrative hearing.
   (N)   Hearing - findings and determination.
      (1)   The hearing officer shall submit to the City Manager a written
statement of decision, together with written findings of fact upon which such
decision is based, within 30 days of the close of the hearing.
      (2)   The hearing officer's decision shall include a determination in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter of the amount of the rent
increase, if any, which is required to provide the landlord with a fair return
and findings as to the income, operating expenses, and net operating income of
the park in the base year and the current year with a breakdown of allowable
expenses in accordance with the categories set forth in the application form.
      (3)   The allowance or disallowance of any proposed rent increase or
portion thereof may be reasonably conditioned in any manner necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
   (O)   Notice of decision. The City Manager shall forthwith mail copies of
the decision to the park owner and all affected mobilehome owners and
mobilehome tenants.
   (P)   Modification of decision in the event of mathematical or clerical
inaccuracies. Any party alleging that the hearing officer's statement of
decision contains mathematic or clerical inaccuracies may so notify the City
Manager within 15 calendar days of the mailing of the decision. The City
Manager shall refer such allegations to the hearing officer, who shall review
the decision, make any corrections warranted, and re-file the statement of
decision within ten working days of the referral by the City Manager. Upon re-
filing of the statement, the decision shall be final.
   (Q)   Completion of hearing and issuance of decision. After a petition is
deemed complete, the overall time for conducting a hearing and issuing a
decision by the hearing officer shall not exceed 121 days.
   (R)   Appeal of decision of hearing officer to the Planning Commission.
      (1)   The hearing officer's decision may be appealed to the Planning
Commission within 30 days after the decision is delivered to the park owner and
the mobilehome owner's representative.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall hear the appeal within 45 days after
the appeal is filed.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall hear arguments by the parties based
upon the material submitted in the hearing before the hearing officer. Any
party at a proceeding may also submit a transcript of the hearing at its
expense.
      (4)   No further evidence shall be permitted at the hearing before the
Planning Commission. The hearing before the Planning Commission shall be based
solely upon the materials presented to the hearing officer at the evidentiary
hearing.
      (5)   Within 30 days after the date of hearing the Planning Commission
shall:
         (a)   Accept and confirm the recommendations of the hearing officer
and adopt the hearing officer's findings and recommendations; or
         (b)   Amend the findings and decision of the hearing officer; or
         (c)   Send the matter back to the hearing officer for further hearings
of the issue pursuant to any instructions provided by the Planning Commission,
including a direction to consider additional evidence.
   (S)   Appeal of City Council's decision. The determination of the Planning
Commission shall be subject to review pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure
§ 1094.5 as a final administrative determination, within the time constraints
established pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6.
   (T)   Attendance of mobilehome owners at administrative hearing. Any
decisions pursuant to this section shall apply to all mobilehome owners subject
to the proposed rent increase regardless of whether such owner was present or
represented at the hearing.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.09 RENT INCREASES FOR NEW CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   A park owner may obtain a pass-through of a new capital improvement
costs under this section. Any capital improvement assessment shall be
identified separately and listed on rent statements along with their date of
expiration.
   (B)   New capital improvements. Improvements that did not previously exist
in the park shall be deemed "new capital improvements", unless the park owner
was required by law to make the capital improvements. A park owner may charge
each affected mobilehome owner as additional rent the pro-rata share of new
service and capital improvement costs including financing costs subject to the
following preconditions:
      (1)   Prior to initiating the service or incurring the capital
improvement cost, the park owner must consult with the mobilehome owners
regarding the nature and purpose of the improvements and the estimated cost of
the improvements.
      (2)   The park owner must obtain the prior written consent of at least
one adult mobilehome owner in each of a majority of the mobilehome spaces which
are occupied by the mobilehome owner to the proposed capital improvement. Each
space shall have only one vote.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.10 RENT REDUCTIONS FOR SERVICE REDUCTIONS.
   (A)   Definition.  SERVICE REDUCTIONS shall mean the elimination or
reduction of any service or facility provided as of September, 2008. SERVICE
shall also include physical improvements or amenities.
   (B)   Submission of service reduction complaint to City Manager. A service
reduction complaint shall be submitted to the City Manager alleging in a
written form and should state:
      (1)   The affected spaces;
      (2)   The prior level of service established by the park owner for that
homeowner's mobilehome space and common facilities used by that homeowner;
      (3)   The specific changes in the prior level of services comprising the
alleged reduction in service;
      (4)   The date the service reduction was first noticed by the homeowner;
      (5)   The date of notice to the park owner of the alleged service
reduction, and if such notice was given, whether the notice was given orally or
in writing;
      (6)   When and how the park owner responded to the homeowner's notice, if
notice was given;
      (7)   Whether the condition was improved or corrected and if so, when and
how;
      (8)   The status of the condition as of the date the complaint is signed;
      (9)   Where such service reduction was the result of a vote of a majority
of the affected homeowners.
   (C)   Submission of service reduction complaint to hearing officer.
      (1)   Thirty days after the service reduction complaint is submitted to
the City Manager, if the dispute is not settled, either one-third of the
tenants in a park or the park owner may request that the dispute be submitted
to a hearing officer.
      (2)   If the hearing officer finds that a material service reduction has
occurred, the hearing officer shall determine the resultant percentage
reduction in the homeowner's enjoyment of their homes due to the service
reduction.
      (3)   Rent shall be reduced by that percentage or amount. The homeowners
also shall be entitled to a rebate of the following sum: the monthly rent
reduction multiplied by the number of months between the date the homeowners
notified the park owner of the reduction in service, and the date the City
Manager determined the rent reduction.
      (4)   A service reduction shall not include the elimination or reduction
of a recreational facility or service when such elimination or reduction and
rent decrease resulting therefrom have the prior written approval of two-thirds
of the homeowners. In such cases no rebate shall be required.
      (5)   No recreational service or facility which has been reduced or
eliminated shall be reinstituted at any cost to the homeowners without prior
written approval of two-thirds of the homeowners.
   (D)   Consolidation of service reduction complaint with consideration of
fair return petition. In the event that a service reduction claim is filed
while a fair return petition is pending, either the city, the park owner, or
the tenants may require consideration of a claim pursuant to this section in
conjunction with the fair return claim.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.11 WAIVERS.
   (A)   Any waiver or purported waiver by a mobilehome owner or mobilehome
tenant of rights granted under this chapter shall be void as contrary to public
policy.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a landlord to require or attempt to require,
as a condition of tenancy in a mobilehome park, a mobilehome owner, mobilehome
tenant, prospective mobilehome owner, or prospective mobilehome tenant to waive
in a lease or rental agreement or in any other agreement the rights granted to
a mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant by this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a landlord to deny or threaten to deny
tenancy in a mobilehome park to any person on account of such person's refusal
to enter into a lease or rental agreement or any other agreement under which
such person would waive the rights granted to a mobilehome owner or mobilehome
tenant by this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.12 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE PARK OWNER TO TENANTS AND
PROSPECTIVE TENANTS.
   A copy of this chapter shall be posted in the office of every mobilehome
park and in the recreation building or clubhouse of every mobilehome park.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.13 INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED BY THE CITY TO MOBILEHOME OWNERS AND THE
PUBLIC.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the date this chapter goes into effect the city
shall provide each tenant with a copy of this chapter.
   (B)   The city's web-page shall include a copy of the chapter, a summary of
the chapter and other issues related to mobilehome park space rentals within
the city, and a copy of California Mobilehome Residency Law.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.14 RESIDENT REPRESENTATIVES.
   The residents of each mobilehome park in the city shall annually elect by
majority vote, with one vote per space, a resident representative to receive
all notices required by this chapter. The residents shall advise the City
Manager of the name, address and phone number of the elected resident
representative in writing no later than January 31st of each year and shall
promptly notify the City Manager of any change of representative.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.15 RIGHTS OF PROSPECTIVE TENANTS.
   (A)   Any prospective tenant must be offered the option of renting a
mobilehome space in a manner which will permit the "tenant-to-be" to receive
the benefits of the Mobilehome Space Rent Stabilization Program which includes,
but is not limited to, rental of a mobilehome space on a month-to-month basis.
Such a person cannot be denied the option of a tenancy of 12-months or less in
duration.
   (B)   The park owner shall provide each prospective tenant with a photocopy
of the written notification which is attached as Appendix A of this chapter and
will provide each prospective tenant with a copy of this chapter.
   (C)   Any effort to circumvent the requirements of this section shall be
unlawful.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.16 INITIAL REGISTRATION, ANNUAL REGISTRATION, AND OTHER NOTICES REQUIRED
FROM OWNER.
   (A)   Due date. Every mobilehome park shall file an initial registration
statement by January 1, 2009. Starting in 2010, no later than the February 1 of
each year, each park owner shall file an annual registration statement, on a
form provided by the City Manager.
   (B)   Contents of registration form. The registration forms shall include
the name(s), business address(es), business telephone number(s) of each person
or legal entity possessing an ownership interest in the park and the nature of
such interest; the number of mobilehome spaces within the park; a rent schedule
reflecting the current space rents within the park; a listing of all other
charges, including utilities not included in space rent, paid by mobilehome
owners within the park and the approximate amount of each such charge; the name
and address to which all required notices and correspondence may be sent, and
other information required by the City Manager.
   (C)   Certification of registration forms. All registration forms, and any
documentation accompanying any registration forms, shall contain an affidavit
or declaration, signed by the park owner or a designated agent, with his/her
signature notarized, certifying that the information contained therein is true,
correct and complete.
   (D)   Notice of sale of a park. Upon the sale or transfer of a mobilehome
park, the seller or transferor shall notify the City Manager of the sale or
transfer and of the name and address of the buyer or transferee. Within ten
days of the sale or transfer of a mobilehome park, the buyer or transferee
shall provide a new registration form.
   (E)   Notice to prospective park purchasers. The park owner shall provide
prospective park purchasers with a copy of this chapter and notice that the
following would be a prerequisite to filing a rent increase application
pursuant to §
121.11.
      (1)   A statement of the base year income, expenses, and net operating
income of the park with a breakdown of income and expenses by category.
      (2)   Documents supporting the amounts reported in the income and expense
statement.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.17 RETALIATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any landlord to evict a mobilehome owner or
mobilehome tenant where the landlord's dominant motive in seeking to recover
possession of the rental unit is:
      (1)   Retaliation for the mobilehome owner's or mobilehome tenant's
organizing, petitioning government for rent relief, or exercising any right
granted under this chapter; or
      (2)   Evasion of the purposes of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a landlord to retaliate against a mobilehome
owner or mobilehome tenant for the owner's or tenant's assertion or exercise of
rights under this chapter in any manner, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Threatening to bring or bringing an action to recover possession of
a rental unit.
      (2)   Engaging in any form of harassment that causes the owner or tenant
to quit the premises.
      (3)   Decreasing housing services.
      (4)   Increasing rent.
      (5)   Imposing or increasing a security deposit or other charge payable
by the owner or tenant.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.18 EXCESSIVE RENTS OR DEMANDS THEREFORE.
   It shall be unlawful for a park owner to demand, accept, receive, or retain
any rent in excess of the amounts authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.19 EXCESSIVE RENTS - CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   If any person is found to have demanded, accepted, received or
retained any payment of rent:
      (1)   In excess of the maximum rent allowed by this chapter such person
shall be liable to the mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant from whom such
payment was demanded, accepted, received, or retained for damages as determined
by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   In the event a mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant is the prevailing
party in a civil action against a person found to have demanded, accepted,
received or retained any payment of rent described in division (A) of this
section, such mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant, in addition to damages as
determined by the court pursuant to division (A) of this section, may, in the
discretion of the court, be awarded an amount not to exceed $500 or three times
the damages determined by the court pursuant to division (A) of this section,
whichever is greater. For the purposes of this division, a mobilehome owner or
mobilehome tenant shall be deemed to be a prevailing party if the judgment is
rendered in such mobilehome owner's or mobilehome tenant's favor or if the
litigation is dismissed in such mobilehome owner's or mobilehome tenant's favor
prior to final judgment, unless the parties otherwise agree in the settlement
or compromise.
   (C)   Any person who suffers damages because of the failure of a mobilehome
park landlord or a selling or transferring mobilehome owner to provide the
information required to be provided by §
121.15 may bring an action for damages in a court of competent jurisdiction and
shall be entitled to recover damages, as determined by the court, from such
mobilehome park landlord or such selling or transferring mobilehome owner.
   (D)   Remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other legal
or equitable remedies and are not intended to be exclusive.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.20 RULES AND GUIDELINES.
   The City Manager may adopt rules and procedures to implement the
applications, notices, registration, verification and certification required by
this chapter, and for the review of rent increase applications and the conduct
of hearings. Such rules and guidelines shall be submitted to the City Council
for review and approval.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
§ 121.21 AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL TO BRING CIVIL ACTION TO COMPEL COMPLIANCE.
   The City Council may institute a civil action to compel compliance with this
chapter.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
APPENDIX A
IMPORTANT NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE HOMEOWNER REGARDING THE PROPOSED RENTAL
AGREEMENT FOR THE                                              MOBILEHOME PARK.
   PLEASE TAKE NOTICE THAT THIS RENTAL AGREEMENT CREATES A TENANCY WITH A TERM
IN EXCESS OF TWELVE-MONTHS.
   BY SIGNING THIS RENTAL AGREEMENT, YOU ARE EXEMPTING THIS MOBILE HOME SPACE
FROM THE PROVISIONS OF THE CITY OF RIVERBANK MOBILEHOME RENT REVIEW LAW FOR THE
TERM OF THIS RENTAL AGREEMENT.
   THE CITY OF RIVERBANK MOBILEHOME RENT REVIEW LAW AND THE STATE MOBILEHOME
RESIDENCY LAW (CALIFORNIA CIVIL CODE SEC. 798 et seq.) GIVE YOU CERTAIN RIGHTS
BEFORE SIGNING THIS RENTAL AGREEMENT. YOU MAY CHOOSE TO SEE A LAWYER.
   UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW, YOU HAVE A RIGHT TO BE OFFERED A RENTAL
AGREEMENT FOR:
      (1)   A TERM OF TWELVE MONTHS, OR
      (2)   A LESSER PERIOD AS YOU MAY REQUEST, OR
      (3)   A LONGER PERIOD AS YOU AND THE MOBILEHOME PARK MANAGEMENT MAY
AGREE. YOU HAVE A RIGHT TO REVIEW THIS AGREEMENT FOR 30-DAYS BEFORE ACCEPTING
OR REJECTING IT.
   IF YOU SIGN THE AGREEMENT YOU MAY CANCEL THE AGREEMENT BY NOTIFYING THE PARK
MANAGEMENT IN WRITING OF THE CANCELLATION WITHIN 72-HOURS OF YOUR EXECUTION OF
THE AGREEMENT.
   IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR A MOBILEHOME PARK OWNER OR ANY AGENT OR REPRESENTATIVE OF
THE OWNER TO DISCRIMINATE AGAINST YOU BECAUSE OF THE EXERCISE OF ANY RIGHTS YOU
MAY HAVE UNDER THE CITY OF RIVERBANK MOBILEHOME RENT REVIEW LAW, OR BECAUSE OF
YOUR CHOICE TO ENTER INTO A RENTAL AGREEMENT WHICH IS SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS
OF THAT LAW.
(Ord. 2008-015, passed 10-27-08)
CHAPTER 122: VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISE
Section
General Provisions
   
122.01   Purpose and authority
   
122.02   Definitions
Franchise Provisions
   
122.03   State video franchise applications
   
122.04   State video franchise holder franchise fee
   
122.05   Public, educational, and government (PEG) fee
   
122.06   Public, educational, and government channels
   
122.07   Customer service penalties; appeal
   
122.08   Permit for public right-of-way; appeal
   
122.09   Environmental review
   
122.10   Authority to examine business records
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 122.01 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the Digital Infrastructure and
Video Competition Act of 2006, (“DIVCA”) set forth at Cal. Public Utilities
Code (“PUC”) § 5800 et seq. that became effective January 1, 2007. Consistent
with DIVCA, and the implementing rules issued by the California Public
Utilities Commission (“CPUC”) dated March 1, 2007, the city retains local city
authority and implements that authority pursuant to DIVCA by implementation of
this chapter. This chapter shall be applied to and interpreted consistently
with any amendments to, or recodifications of DIVCA that may be made from time
to time.
(Ord. 2008-017, passed 12-22-08; Am. Ord. 2018-004, passed 3-27-18)
§ 122.02 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS REVENUE. Has the meaning set forth in Cal. Public Utilities Code §
5860(d).
   VIDEO SERVICE, VIDEO FRANCHISE, and HOLDER. Shall have the same meaning as
those terms are defined in Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5830.
   Terms not defined herein shall have the same meaning as established in (in
order of priority): (1) the California Public Utilities Code; (2) commission
rules implementing the California Public Utilities Code; and (3) Title 47
U.S.C. Title VI.
(Ord. 2008-017, passed 12-22-08; Am. Ord. 2018-004, passed 3-27-18)
FRANCHISE PROVISIONS
§ 122.03 STATE VIDEO FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Copy or application to city. An applicant for a state video franchise
within the boundaries of the city must concurrently provide a complete copy of
any application or amendments to an application to the City Clerk that is filed
with the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). (PUC § 5840(e)(1)(D))
   (B)   City Manager comments. Within 30 days of receipt, the City Manager
will provide any appropriate comments to the CPUC regarding an application or
an amendment to an application for a state video franchise.
   (C)   Notification of video service. Prior to offering video service in the
city, the state video franchise holder shall notify the City Clerk at least ten
days, but no more than 60 days, before the video service provider begins to
offer service. (PUC § 5840(n))
(Ord. 2008-017, passed 12-22-08; Am. Ord. 2018-004, passed 3-27-18)
§ 122.04 STATE VIDEO FRANCHISE HOLDER FRANCHISE FEE.
   Any state video franchise holder operating within the city shall remit a
franchise fee to the city in the amount equal to 5% of the gross revenues of
the state video franchise holder derived from the operation of its franchise
within the city in compliance with Cal. Public Utilities Code §§ 5840(q) and
5860.
   (A)   A state video franchise holder shall pay the franchise fee to the city
quarterly, within 45-days after the end of each calendar quarter.
   (B)   Each payment shall be accompanied by a summary explaining the basis
for the calculation of the fee.
   (C)   Pursuant to Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5860(h) if the franchise
holder does not pay the franchise fee when due, the franchise holder shall pay
a late payment charge at a rate per year equal to the highest prime lending
rate during the period of delinquency, plus 1%.
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 3-27-18)
§ 122.05 PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, AND GOVERNMENT (PEG) FEE.
   Any state video franchise holder operating within the city shall remit to
the city a Public, Educational, and Government ("PEG") fee in the amount equal
to 1% of the gross revenue of the state video franchise holder derived from the
operation of its franchise within the city to support public, educational, and
governmental channel facilities in compliance with Cal. Public Utilities Code §
5870(n).
   (A)   A state video franchise holder shall pay the franchise fee to the city
quarterly, within 45-days after the end of each calendar quarter.
   (B)   All revenue collected pursuant to this fee shall be deposited in a
separate fund and shall only be expended for the purpose of supporting PEG
channel facilities.
   (C)   Automatic reauthorization. Notwithstanding Cal. Public Utilities Code
§ 5870, upon the expiration of any state video franchise, without any action of
the City Council, this code section shall be deemed to have been automatically
reauthorized upon the renewal of a state video franchise by the CPUC to a state
video franchise holder operating within the city, unless the holder has given
the City Manager and City Clerk written notice 60 days prior to the expiration
of its state video franchise that this section will expire pursuant to the
terms of Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5870(n), or until such time that the City
Council takes formal affirmative action to cease the reauthorization.
(Ord. 2008-017, passed 12-22-08; Am. Ord. 2018-004, passed 3-27-18)
§ 122.06 PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, AND GOVERNMENT CHANNELS.
   (A)   PEG channel capacity. A state video franchise holder that uses the
public rights-of-way shall designate sufficient capacity on its network to
enable the carriage of a least two PEG access channels.
      (1)   PEG access channels shall be for the exclusive use of the city or
its designees to provide public, educational, or governmental programming.
      (2)   Advertising, underwriting, or sponsorship recognition may be
carried on the PEG access channels for the purpose of funding PEG-related
activities.
      (3)   The PEG access channels shall be carried on the basic service tier;
provided, however, that if the technology used eliminates the basic service
tier, then all PEG access channels shall be placed on the cable system in a
manner equivalent to local over-the-air broadcast stations.
      (4)   To the extent feasible, the PEG access channels shall not be
separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier,
and the channel numbers for the PEG access channels shall be the same channel
numbers used by the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by Federal Law.
      (5)   After the initial designation of PEG access channel numbers, the
channel numbers shall not be changed without the prior written consent of the
city, unless the change is required by Federal Law.
      (6)   Each PEG access channel shall be capable of carrying a National
Television System Committee television signal.
   (B)   Emergency Alert System and emergency overrides. A state video
franchise holder must comply with the Emergency Alert System requirements of
the Federal Communications Commission in order that the emergency messages may
be distributed over the holder's network. Provisions in the city-issued
franchise authorizing the city to provide local emergency notifications shall
remain in effect, and shall apply to all state video franchise holders in the
city for the duration of the city-issued franchise, or until the term of the
franchise would have expired had it not been terminated pursuant to Cal. Public
Utilities Code § 5840(m), or until January 1, 2009, whichever is later.
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 3-27-18)
§ 122.07 CUSTOMER SERVICE PENALTIES; APPEAL.
   (A)   Any state video franchise holder shall comply with the customer
service provisions set forth in Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5900.
   (B)   The city shall monitor the compliance of state video franchise holders
with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards.
The City Manager will provide the state video franchise holder written notice
of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will
allow the state video franchise holder 30 days from the receipt of the notice
to remedy the specified material breach.
   (C)   The city shall impose the following penalties against a state video
franchise holder for any material breach of the customer service provisions not
remedied within the 30-day time period as set forth in Cal. Public Utilities
Code § 5900:
      (1)   For the first occurrence of a material breach, a fine of $500 shall
be imposed for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $1,500 for each
occurrence of the material breach.
      (2)   For a second occurrence of a material breach of the same nature as
the first material breach that occurs within 12 months, a fine of $1,000 shall
be imposed for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $3,000 for each
occurrence of the material breach.
      (3)   For a third or further occurrence of a material breach of the same
nature as the previous material breaches that occurs within 12 months, a fine
of $2,500 shall be imposed for each day of each material breach, not to exceed
$7,500 for each occurrence of the material breach.
   (D)   A material breach for the purposes of assessing penalties shall be
deemed to have occurred for each day within the jurisdiction of the city,
following the expiration of the period specified in division (C) of this
section, that any material breach has not been remedied by the state video
franchise holder, irrespective of the number of customers affected. No monetary
penalties shall be assessed for a material breach if it is out of the
reasonable control of the state video franchise holder.
   (E)   Pursuant to Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5900, any penalty remitted to
the city by a state video franchise holder for a material breach of the
customer service provisions set forth in Cal. Public Utilties Code § 5900 shall
be split in half, and the city shall submit one-half of the penalty amount to
the Digital Divide Account established by Cal. Public Utilities Code § 280.5.
   (F)   Appeal. A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed
by the City Manager to the City Council within 60 days of the initial
assessment by sending a letter of request for an appeal hearing, along with
payment of the fee, to the City Clerk. The matter for a hearing shall be set
with the City Council to receive all evidence and relevant testimony. The
Council may uphold, modify, or vacate the penalty or decision. The City
Council's decision on the imposition of a penalty or decision is final.
(Ord. 2008-017, passed 12-22-08; Am. Ord. 2018-004, passed 3-27-18)
§ 122.08 PERMIT FOR PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY; APPEAL.
   (A)   Encroachment permit. To the extent allowed by law, any state video
franchise holder shall apply for an encroachment permit to install, construct
or maintain a network pursuant to this code. In addition to Riverbank Municipal
Code procedures, the following shall apply to any state video franchise holder
applying for an encroachment permit:
      (1)   Any encroachment permit application submitted by any state video
franchise holder shall be approved or denied within 60 days of receipt of a
completed application. An application for an encroachment permit is complete
when the state video franchise holder has complied with all statutory
requirements, including CEQA, pursuant to Cal. Public Resource Code §§ 21000 et
seq.
      (2)   The 60-day time period for approval or denial of an encroachment
permit application may be extended if mutually agreed to in a written agreement
between the state video franchise holder and the city.
      (3)   Any denial of an encroachment permit application submitted to any
state video franchise holder by the city shall be written and shall include a
detailed explanation of the reason for the denial.
      (4)   Appeal. Any state video franchise holder may appeal a denial of an
encroachment permit application or a condition placed on an approved
encroachment permit to the City Council by submitting a written appeal within
15 days of the date the application was denied or condition imposed. The City
Clerk shall thereafter give written notice to the holder of a hearing to be
held within 30 days of receipt of the appeal. The decision of the City Council
on the appeal shall be final.
   (B)   Other permits. A state video franchise holder shall apply for any
other permits required by this code to the extent allowed by law.
(Ord. 2008-017, passed 12-22-08; Am. Ord. 2018-004, passed 3-27-18)
§ 122.09 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW.
   The city shall serve as the lead agency for any environmental review under
DIVCA. The city may impose conditions to mitigate environmental impacts of any
state video franchise holder's use of the public rights-of-way that may be
required pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, Cal. Public
Resources Code §§ 21000 et seq. ("CEQA").
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 3-27-18)
§ 122.10 AUTHORITY TO EXAMINE BUSINESS RECORDS.
   (A)   The city may examine once per year the business records of the state
video franchise holder relating to gross revenues in a manner consistent with
Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5860(i).
   (B)   All state video franchise holders shall keep and maintain all business
records reflecting any gross revenues, regardless of change in ownership, for
at least four years after those gross revenues are recognized by the holder on
its books and records pursuant to Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5860.
(Ord. 2018-004, passed 3-27-18)
CHAPTER 123: TOBACCO AND E-CIGARETTE SALES LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
123.01   Legislative intent
   
123.02   Definitions
   
123.03   Requirement for tobacco and e-cigarette retailer license
   
123.04   Performance standards; deemed approved activities
   
123.05   Automatic deemed approved status
   
123.06   Application procedure
   
123.07   Issuance of license
   
123.08   Display of license
   
123.09   License fee
   
123.10   Licenses not transferable
   
123.11   License violation
   
123.12   Suspension, termination or revocation of license
   
123.13   Administrative fine
   
123.14   Appeals Board appeals
   
123.15   Enforcement
§ 123.01 LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of this chapter to implement Riverbank's adopted
Vision Statement that, "Riverbank in 2025 will be a pleasant, quiet, friendly
community with a distinct small-town character'; and that "Our city should be
safe and healthy for all our residents". The uncontrolled sale of tobacco
products hinders achievement of this adopted vision. It is the intent of the
city to encourage responsible tobacco and e-cigarette retailing and to
discourage violations of tobacco and e-cigarette related laws, especially those
which prohibit or discourage the sale or distribution of tobacco, e-cigarette,
and nicotine products to minors, but not to expand or reduce the degree to
which the acts regulated by federal or state law are criminally proscribed or
to alter the penalties provided therein.
   (B)   In order to facilitate the achievement of this vision and to protect
the public health, safety and welfare, the City Council finds that a local
licensing system for tobacco and e-cigarette retailers is appropriate. Tobacco
and e-cigarette sales licensing will ensure that retailers comply with tobacco
and e-cigarette control laws and the business standards of the city.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
§ 123.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have
the meaning provided in this section unless the context clearly requires
otherwise:
   APPELLANT. A person who appeals a Finance Department decision to the Appeals
Board.
   APPEALS BOARD. The Planning Commission.
   E-CIGARETTE. A device used to simulate the experience of smoking, having a
cartridge with a heater or other mechanism that vaporizes liquid nicotine
instead of burning tobacco. Also referred to as an electronic cigarette or e-
cig.
   ILLEGAL PARAPHERNALIA. Means any equipment, product, or material that is
modified for making, using, or concealing illegal drugs such as cocaine,
heroin, and methamphetamine. Drug paraphernalia generally falls into two
categories including user-specific products and dealer-specific products.
      (1)   User-specific products. These products include items that are
marketed to illegal drug users to assist them in taking or concealing illegal
drugs. These products include glass hashish pipes, crack cocaine pipes, smoking
masks, hashish bongs, cocaine freebase kits, syringes, and items such as
hollowed-out cosmetic cases or fake phones or pagers used to conceal illegal
drugs. Also included are items for commercially growing hydroponic marijuana,
such as guidebooks, fertilizer, and fluorescent grow-lights, and products
purported to cleanse an individual's system of drug residues to increase the
individual's chance of passing a urine analysis for drug use.
      (2)   Dealer-specific products. These products include items that are
used by drug traffickers for preparing illegal drugs for distribution at the
street level. Items such as digital scales and vials that can be used to sell
crack, heroin, or marijuana are also within the purview of this definition.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, partnership, trust, estate, association,
corporation, or organization of any kind. Where a principal acts through an
agent, the word "person" shall include both such principal and agent.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping
tobacco, bidis, liquid nicotine, or any other preparation of tobacco.
   TOBACCO AND E-CIGARETTE RETAILER. Any person who sells, offers for sale, or
does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, e-
cigarettes, or tobacco products.
   TOBACCO AND E-CIGARETTE RETAILING. The doing of any of these things: This
definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, e-cigarette, or
tobacco products sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
§ 123.03 REQUIREMENT FOR TOBACCO AND E-CIGARETTE RETAILER LICENSE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco or e-cigarette
retailer without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco and e-
cigarette retailer's license pursuant to this chapter for each location at
which that activity is to occur. No license may be issued to authorize tobacco
and e-cigarette retailing at other than a fixed location. For example, tobacco
and e-cigarette retailing by persons on foot and tobacco and e-cigarette
retailing from vehicles are prohibited.
   (B)   The following standards are met prior to issuance of a tobacco and e-
cigarette retail license: Sale of tobacco and e-cigarette products shall have
500 foot spacing from any school, or playground; and, flashing or electronic
signage within view of schools, playgrounds, or residential districts shall be
prohibited.
   (C)   The term of a license is one year from the date of issuance, unless
earlier suspended, terminated, or revoked pursuant to §
123.12. Each tobacco and e-cigarette retailer shall apply for the renewal of
his or her tobacco and e-cigarette retailer's license no later than 30 days
prior to its expiration.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person
obtaining and maintaining a tobacco and e-cigarette retailer's license any
status or right other than the right to act as a tobacco and e-cigarette
retailer at the location in the city identified on the face of the license. For
example, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable,
supersede, or apply in lieu of any other provision of applicable law,
including, without limitation, any condition or limitation on smoking in
enclosed places of employment made applicable to business establishments by
Labor Code § 6404.5.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
§ 123.04 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS; DEEMED APPROVED ACTIVITIES.
   An activity shall retain its deemed approved status only if it conforms to
all of the following deemed approved performance standards:
   (A)   That the tobacco and e-cigarette retailer shall not offer for sale
illegal paraphernalia. The offering of sale of such shall result in immediate
suspension of a tobacco and e-cigarette license;
   (B)   That the tobacco and e-cigarette retailer does not sell tobacco or e-
cigarette products to underage minors pursuant to state and federal laws;
   (C)   That the tobacco and e-cigarette retailer does not adversely affect
the peace, or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area;
   (D)   That it does not result in repeated nuisance activities within the
premises or in close proximity of the premises, including but not limited to
disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, harassment of passersby, acts
of vandalism, excessive littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, curfew
violations, or police detentions and arrests;
   (E)   That it does not result in violations to any applicable provision of
any other city, state, or federal regulation, ordinance or statute;
   (F)   That its upkeep and operating characteristics are compatible with and
will not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of the
surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
§ 123.05 AUTOMATIC DEEMED APPROVED STATUS.
   All tobacco and e-cigarette retailer commercial activities that were legal
activities immediately prior to the effective date of the tobacco and e-
cigarette sale regulations shall automatically become deemed approved
activities as of the effective date of the regulations and shall no longer be
considered legal nonconforming activities. Each such deemed approved activity
shall retain its deemed approved status as long as it complies with the deemed
approved performance standards.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
§ 123.06 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   Application for a tobacco and e-cigarette retailer's license shall be
submitted in the name of each person proposing to conduct retail tobacco and e-
cigarette sales and shall be signed by each person or an authorized agent
thereof. It is the responsibility of each person to be informed of the laws
affecting the issuance of a tobacco and e-cigarette retailer's license. A
license that is issued, in error or on the basis of false or misleading
information supplied by a person, may be revoked pursuant to §
123.12. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the
department and shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name, address, and telephone number of each person;
   (B)   The business name, address, and telephone number of each location for
which a tobacco retailer's license is sought;
   (C)   A floor plan of the establishment that clearly shows the location
within the establishment where the tobacco and e-cigarette products are to be
stored;
   (D)   The name and mailing address authorized by each person to receive all
license-related communications and notices (the "authorized address"). If an
authorized address is not supplied, each person shall be understood to consent
to the provision of notice at the business address specified pursuant to
division (B) of this section;
   (E)   Whether or not any person has previously been issued a license
pursuant to this chapter that is, or was at any time, suspended or revoked and,
if so, the dates of the suspension period or the date of revocation;
   (F)   Such other information as the Finance Department deems necessary for
the administration or enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
§ 123.07 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Upon the receipt of an application for a tobacco and e-cigarette retailer's
license that meets the requirements of this chapter, and payment of the license
fee, the Finance Department shall issue a license, unless:
   (A)   The application is incomplete or inaccurate; or
   (B)   The application seeks authorization for tobacco and e-cigarette
retailing by a person for which or for whom a suspension is in effect, or by a
person which or who has had any license revoked pursuant to the Riverbank Code
of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
§ 123.08 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Each license shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location
at the licensed premises.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
§ 123.09 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee to issue or to renew a tobacco and e-cigarette retailer's license
shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
§ 123.10 LICENSES NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   A tobacco and e-cigarette retailer's license is not transferable. If the
information required in the license application pursuant to §
123.06(A), (B) or (C) changes, the tobacco and e-cigarette retailer must notify
the Finance Department within 14 days, and update all information on the
license application form in order to continue to act as a tobacco and e-
cigarette retailer. For example, if a tobacco and e-cigarette retailer to whom
a license has been issued changes business location, that tobacco and e-
cigarette retailer must supply updated license information within 14 days of
acting as a tobacco or e-cigarette retailer at the new location. If a business
is sold, the new owner must apply for a license for that location before acting
as a tobacco and e-cigarette retailer. The current licensee shall notify the
Finance Department of the sale of the tobacco and e-cigarette retailing
business.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
§ 123.11 LICENSE VIOLATION.
   (A)   Violation of tobacco-related and e-cigarette-related laws. It shall be
a violation of a tobacco or e-cigarette retailer's license for a person or his
or her agent or employee to violate any local, state, or federal tobacco-
related or any e-cigarette-related law.
   (B)   License compliance monitoring. The city anticipates that compliance
checks of each tobacco and e-cigarette retailer will be conducted at least two
times during each 12-month period by the Stanislaus County Public Health
Department. The city shall not enforce any tobacco-related or e-cigarette-
related minimum age law against a person who otherwise would be in violation of
such law because of the person's age (hereinafter "youth decoy") if the
violation occurs when:
      (1)   The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised
by a law enforcement official, a code enforcement official, or any peace
officer; or
      (2)   The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check funded or
supervised in part by the County of Stanislaus or, funded or supervised in any
part by the California Department of Health Services.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
§ 123.12 SUSPENSION, TERMINATION, OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Suspension, termination, or revocation of license for violation. In
addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco and e-cigarette
retailer's license may be suspended or revoked, if the Finance Department
determines that the person or his or her agents or employees have violated the
requirements of this chapter or other conditions of the license imposed
pursuant to §
123.04. A person who loses his or her license for one location does not lose it
for all locations, if those locations are in compliance with this chapter, and
may renew licenses for other conforming locations. A person cannot obtain a new
license for a new location so long as there is a suspension in effect for any
location.
      (1)   Notice required. The licensee shall be served with written notice
of all determinations or decisions under this section affecting his or her
license. Notice shall be served by personal service, overnight courier,
certified mail return receipt requested, or U.S. mail with first class postage
affixed. The notice shall be sent to the business address on file. All notices
shall be deemed served, when received, except for notices sent by first class
mail which shall be deemed served two days after deposit in the U.S. mail if
addressed to a location within Stanislaus County and five days if addressed to
a location outside Stanislaus County. The notice shall describe the legal and
factual basis for the decision. A decision imposing a line shall specify the
amount of the fine. A decision to suspend or revoke a license shall specify the
beginning and ending dates of the suspension or the effective date of the
revocation. No decision shall become effective in less than ten days from the
date of service.
      (2)   Duration of suspensions.
         (a)   Upon a finding by the Finance Department of a first license
violation within any 36-month period, the license shall be suspended for 14
days. However, prior to imposing the suspension, the Finance Department shall
by letter (an "advice letter") advise the person that if the person trains all
sales employees at the location of the sale in the laws pertaining to the sale
of tobacco and e-cigarette products to minors and techniques to ensure future
compliance with said laws, the suspension will not go into effect. Within 30
days of the issuance of the advice letter, the person must file with the
Finance Department an affidavit signed by the person and the sales employees
that said training has been completed. If the person fails to timely submit the
affidavit, the Finance Department shall notify the person that the permit is
suspended for 14 days.
         (b)   Upon a finding by the Finance Department of a second license
violation within any 36-month period, the license shall be suspended for 21
days.
         (c)   Upon a finding by the Finance Department of a third license
violation within any 36-month period, the license shall be suspended for 30
days.
         (d)   Upon a finding by the Finance Department of a fourth license
violation within any 36-month period, the license shall be revoked and the
person or persons who had been issued the license shall not be issued a tobacco
and e-cigarette retailer's license pursuant to this chapter for a period of
three years from the date of revocation.
   (B)   Failure to pay renewal fees. A tobacco and e-cigarette retailer's
license which is not timely renewed pursuant to §
123.03(C) is an expired license. The tobacco and e-cigarette retailer shall not
engage in tobacco and e-cigarette retailing at the licensed location until a
new license has been issued for that location.
   (C)   Revocation of license issued in error. A tobacco and e-cigarette
retailer's license shall be revoked if the Finance Department determines that
one or more of the basis for denial of a license under §§
123.03 or
123.04 existed at the time application was made or at any time before the
license was issued. The revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of
a new application for a license.
   (D)   License suspension requires the removal of all tobacco and e-cigarette
products from public view. A tobacco and e-cigarette retailer whose license is
suspended must remove from public view all tobacco and e-cigarette products and
tobacco and e-cigarette advertising for the duration of the suspension. Failure
to remove such items from view will be regarded as a violation of this chapter
equivalent to that of selling to minors.
   (E)   Revocation of license obtained under false pretenses. Tobacco and e-
cigarette retailers whose license is obtained under false pretenses shall have
that license revoked. A licensee whose license is revoked pursuant to this
section may not apply for a new license for a period of one year from the date
the license is revoked.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
§ 123.13 ADMINISTRATIVE FINE.
   (A)   Grounds for a fine. If the Finance Department determines that any
unlicensed person, including a person named on a revoked or suspended license,
has engaged in tobacco and e-cigarette retailing in violation of this chapter,
the Finance Department shall fine that person as follows:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation in any 36-month
period;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation in any 36-month
period; or
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $500 for a third or subsequent violation in
any 36-month period.
      (4)   Each day that such a person engages in tobacco and e-cigarette
retailing shall constitute a separate violation.
   (B)   Imposition of Fine. If no request for a hearing is timely received in
accordance with §
123.14, the Finance Department's determination on the violation and the
imposition of a fine shall be final and payment shall be made within 30 days
after notice of the fine was served in accordance with §
123.12(A)(1). If the fine is not paid within that time, the fine may be
collected, along with interest at the legal rate, in any manner provided by
law. In the event that a judicial action is necessary to compel payment of the
fine and accumulated interest, the person or persons subject to the fine shall
also be liable for the costs of the suit and attorney's fees incurred by the
city in collecting the tine.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
§ 123.14 APPEALS BOARD APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeal of fine, suspension, or revocation. A decision of the Finance
Department to impose a fine or to revoke or suspend a license may be appealed
to the Appeals Board. The appellant must file a written notice of appeal with
the City Clerk's office within ten days after service of the notice of the
decision. Failure to file an appeal within ten days waives any right to further
challenge the Finance Department's decision. "File" means delivered to the City
Clerk's office in the Riverbank City Hall. The filing of a notice of appeal
automatically stays the Finance Department's decision, until the Appeals Board
has served its final decision on the appeal. The Appeals Board may reverse,
modify or uphold the Finance Department's decision.
   (B)   Notice of hearing, If a notice of appeal is timely filed, the City
Clerk shall provide written notice to the appellant of the date, time, and
place of the hearing in the manner specified in this chapter. A hearing may not
be conducted less than 20 days after notice is given to the appellant.
   (C)   Hearing. The Appeals Board rules governing the conduct of its hearings
shall include the following:
      (1)   The Finance Department shall submit evidence at the hearing
substantiating its decision. Such evidence may include testimony, police or
other reports of the incident, witness statements and other documents. Not less
than ten days prior to the scheduled hearing, the City Clerk must notify the
appellant of the name, address and phone number of any witness to the
violation, and furnish the appellant with a copy of any document it intends to
submit at the hearing. Not less than seven days prior to the hearing, the
appellant may request the Finance Department to produce at the hearing any
witness the department intends to rely upon to substantiate the violation. The
written request must name the witness or witnesses who are requested to attend
the hearing. The Finance Department may not rely on the testimony of any
witness (including such testimony contained in reports or written witness
statements) whose appearance at the hearing is required by this section, if
that witness fails to appear.
      (2)   Not less than ten days prior to the hearing, the appellant must
notify the City Clerk in writing of the name, address and phone number of any
witness the appellant intends to call as a witness at the hearing, provide a
brief description of the proposed testimony, and furnish the City Clerk with a
copy of any document the appellant intends to offer as evidence at the hearing.
The appellant may not call any witness to testify at the hearing who was not
identified as required by this section or offer any document as evidence at the
hearing that was not provided to the Finance Department as required by this
section.
      (3)   At the hearing, the appellant may be represented by an attorney, at
appellant's expense. Both the Appeals Board and the appellant shall have the
right to examine and cross-examine any witness produced at the hearing. The
rules of evidence that normally apply in court shall not apply in a hearing
before the Appeals Board but the Appeals Board shall only consider evidence
which would be relied upon by reasonable people making an important decision,
and shall disregard evidence which by its nature is unreliable or not credible.
      (4)   The entire hearing shall be electronically or stenographically
recorded. The Appeals Board shall base its decision exclusively on the evidence
presented at the hearing and shall issue a written decision, which includes a
statement of the relevant facts which the committee finds to be true and
explains how the facts support its decision. For example, if the Finance
Department finds that the appellant sold cigarettes or e-cigarettes to a minor,
but this was the first violation committed by the appellant within 36 months,
the decision would explain that §
123.12(B)(2)(a) requires a 14-day suspension of the appellant's license to sell
tobacco and e-cigarette products at the licensed location, and on that basis,
the facts support a 14-day suspension of the license for that location. The
record of the hearing shall be preserved for not less than six months after the
decision is served on the appellant.
   (D)   Hearing decision. The chairperson of the Appeals Board shall issue the
written decision required by division (C)(4) of this section. Copies of the
decision shall be served in accordance with §
123.12(A)(1). The hearing decision shall include notice of the appellant's
right to seek review of the decision pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure
§§ 1094.5 and 1094.6.
   (E)   Finality of the Appeals Board's decision. The decision of the Appeals
Board shall be the final decision for the city.
   (F)   Appeal to Superior Court. Judicial review of the Appeal Board's
decision shall be governed by the Cal. Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1094.5 and
1094.6.
   (G)   Enforcement of decision. Unless stayed by a court, any final decision
of the Appeals Board is effective immediately and may be implemented and
enforced by the department.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
§ 123.15 ENFORCEMENT.
   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any
other remedies available at law or in equity.
   (A)   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of
any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation.
   (B)   Violations of this chapter are declared to be public nuisances.
   (C)   Violations of this chapter are declared to be unfair business
practices and are presumed to at least nominally damage each and every resident
of the community in which the business operates.
   (D)   A violation of this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for six months, or both.
   (E)   In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other
law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by
the city attorney or the district attorney, including, for example,
administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, other legally
authorized enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief.
(Ord. 2015-018, passed 11-24-15)
CHAPTER 124: SIMULATED GAMBLING DEVICES
Section
   
124.01   Definitions
   
124.02   Simulated gambling devices prohibited
   
124.03   State gambling law preemption
§ 124.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. An individual, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
or any other type of organization, whether conducted for profit or not for
profit, or a director, executive, officer, or manager of an association,
partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other organization.
   SIMULATED GAMBLING DEVICE. Any device that, upon connection with an object,
is available to play or operate a computer simulation of a game, where the play
or operation of the device may deliver or entitle to a person or persons
playing or operating the device to a payoff directly or indirectly from the
owner or operator of the device or that person's designee. The following rules
of construction apply to the definition of "simulated gambling device":
      (1)   DEVICE. Any mechanical or electrical contrivance, computer,
terminal, video, or other equipment that may or may not be capable of
downloading games from a central server system, machine, computer, or other
device or equipment. The meaning of device also includes any associated
equipment necessary to conduct the operation of the device.
      (2)   UPON CONNECTION WITH. The insertion, swiping, passing in range, or
any other technical means of physically or electromagnetically connecting an
object to a device, including by manual input by any person of characters,
numbers, or any combination thereof, or other code for the purpose of accessing
or activating a device, or any other mechanism or method by which the object
provides access to the device.
      (3)   OBJECT. A coin, bill, ticket, token, card, characters, numbers, or
any combination thereof, other code, or other tangible or intangible access
mechanism or method, obtained directly or indirectly through payment of
consideration, or obtained as a bonus or supplement to another transaction
involving the payment of consideration.
      (4)   PLAY OR OPERATE or PLAY OR OPERATION. Includes the use of skill,
the application of the element of chance, or both.
      (5)   COMPUTER SIMULATION. Includes simulations by means of a computer,
computer system, video display, video system or any other form of electronic
video presentation.
      (6)   GAME. Includes slot machines, poker, bingo, craps, keno, any other
type of game ordinarily played in a casino, a game involving the display of the
results of a raffle, sweepstakes, drawing, contest, or other promotion, lotto,
an any other game associated with gambling or which could be associated with
gambling. "Game" does not necessarily imply gambling as that term may be
defined elsewhere.
      (7)   PAYOFF. Is cash, monetary or other credit, billet, tickets, tokens,
or electronic credits to be exchanged for cash or to receive merchandise or
anything of value whatsoever, whether made automatically from the machine or
manually.
      (8)   GAMBLING. In the term "simulated gambling device" is for
convenience of reference only. "Simulated gambling device" as used in this
chapter is defined exclusively by this subsection and does not incorporate or
imply any other legal definition or requirement applicable to gambling that may
be found elsewhere.
(Ord. 2014-014, passed 12-9-14)
§ 124.02 SIMULATED GAMBLING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Every person who manages, supervises, maintains, provides, produces,
possesses or uses one or multiple simulated gambling device(s) for commercial
purposes is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each individual act to manage, supervise,
maintain, provide, produce, possess or use a simulated gambling device
constitutes a separate violation of this section.
   (B)   An individual is not prohibited from personal, recreational, and
noncommercial ownership, possession, play, operation, or use of a device which
could be construed to be a simulated gambling device.
(Ord. 2014-014, passed 12-9-14)
§ 124.03 STATE GAMBLING LAW PREEMPTION.
   Nothing in this chapter is intended to conflict with the provision of state
law concerning gambling, slot machines, gambling devices, or lotteries. In the
event of a direct and express conflict between this chapter and state law,
California law, as applicable, controls.
(Ord. 2014-014, passed 12-9-14)
CHAPTER 125: TATTOO AND BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
125.01   Definitions
   
125.02   License application
   
125.03   Investigation by the city
   
125.04   License procedures
   
125.05   Site location and development standards
   
125.06   Hours of operation
   
125.07   Prohibited conduct
§ 125.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BODY ART. Shall mean any act of body piercing, tattooing, branding or
scarification.
   BODY PIERCING. Shall mean the creation of an opening in the body of a human
being for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration. This includes,
but it not limited to piercing of an ear, lip, tongue, nose, or eyebrow. BODY
PIERCING does not, for the purpose of this chapter, include piercing an ear
with a disposable, single-use stud or solid needle that is applied using a
mechanical device to force the needle or stud through the ear.
   BRANDING. Shall mean the use of super-heated metal object, chemical, or
electricity to burn an image into the human body.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. Means all equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are designed for use or marketed for use, in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, or harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance as further defined in
Health and Safety Code section 11014.5.
   PERMANENT COSMETIC FACILITY. Shall mean any premise or establishment and
facilities incidental thereto which involves the application of pigments to or
under human skin for the purpose of permanently changing the color or other
appearance of the skin. This includes but is not limited to permanent eyeliner,
eye shadow, or lip color.
   SCARIFICATION. Shall mean the use of methods or techniques to produce scars
on the human body for decorative purposes, including but not limited to cutting
and skin peeling.
   TATTOO and TATTOOING. Shall mean the process of marking or coloring skin
using the method of placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols, or
other marks upon or under the skin with ink or any other substance resulting in
the coloration of the skin by the aid of needles or any other instrument
designed to penetrate the skin.
   TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT or BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT. Shall mean any premises or
establishment and facilities incidental thereto which engages in the business
of marking or coloring skin, which is the method of placing designs, letters,
scrolls, figures, symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin with ink or
any other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid of
needles or any other instrument designed to penetrate the skin. TATTOO
ESTABLISHMENT or BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT shall include any premises or
establishment and facilities incidental thereto that engages in any form of
permanent alteration to one's skin or body parts including, but not limited to,
body piercing, scarification, and branding. TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT or BODY ART
ESTABLISHMENT shall not include a permanent cosmetic facility.
(Ord. 2015-001, passed 2-24-15)
§ 125.02 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation or partnership desiring to obtain a
license to operate a tattoo establishment or body art establishment shall file
a complete application with all required documentation under penalty of perjury
of the laws of the state. The application shall be in a form prescribed by the
city and shall be accompanied by a copy of the current and complete health
permit issued by the local enforcement agency and a copy of the certificate of
registration for all practitioners performing tattooing or other body art.
   (B)   The tattoo establishment or body art establishment license shall be
renewed each year at the same time that the tattoo establishment or body art
establishment renews its business license with the city.
   (C)   The license is valid only for the location of the facility and the
time period indicated on the license and may not be transferred to another
owner or facility.
   (D)   The city shall promptly reject as incomplete any application which
does not meet all the requirements of this chapter. Upon written request of the
applicant, the city shall notify the applicant in writing, by first class mail,
postage prepaid, to the address supplied to the city by the application, of the
deficiencies in the application.
(Ord. 2015-001, passed 2-24-15)
§ 125.03 INVESTIGATION BY THE CITY.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complete application, all supplemental required
information, and payment of all required fees, the city's community development
director shall refer the application to all appropriate city agencies including
building, planning, police and fire departments. The departments shall review
the application, and where necessary, the proposed location of the tattoo
establishment or body art establishment may be inspected. The community
development director may request any further information which is reasonably
related to the licensing requirement of this chapter. Based on this review, the
community development director shall grant or deny the tattoo establishment or
body art establishment license.
   (B)   The community development director shall grant a tattoo establishment
or body art establishment license where it finds that the establishment,
maintenance or operation of the tattoo establishment or body art establishment,
under the circumstances of the particular case, will not be detrimental to the
health, safety, and general welfare of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood or area of the tattoo establishment or body art establishment or
will not be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the
neighborhood or area or to the general welfare of the city.
   (C)   If the community development director, following investigation of the
applicant, determines that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements set
forth in this chapter, the community development director shall deny the
application by written notice sent via U.S. mail. Following the denial or
revocation of a tattoo establishment or body art establishment license, no
application for a tattoo establishment or body art establishment may be filed
by such applicant, at the same or substantially the same location for at least
one year following the date of such denial or revocation.
(Ord. 2015-001, passed 2-24-15)
§ 125.04 LICENSE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Upon payment of all fees and successful verification of all
requirements of this chapter, a tattoo establishment or body art establishment
shall be issued a tattoo establishment or body art establishment license by the
city.
   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation or partnership denied a license pursuant
to this chapter may appeal the denial in writing pursuant to the procedures
specified in §
153.218: Appeal.
(Ord. 2015-001, passed 2-24-15)
§ 125.05 SITE LOCATION AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Tattoo establishments and body art establishments shall not be located
within 1,000 feet of any other tattoo establishment or body art establishment
as measured from any point from the outer boundaries of the building lease
space containing the tattoo establishment or body art establishment to the
nearest property line of the site containing the existing tattoo establishment
or body art establishment.
   (B)   The tattoo establishment or body art establishment shall not be
located within 500 feet of any adult entertainment business, as defined in
Chapter 118, as measured from any point from the outer boundaries of the
building lease space containing the tattoo establishment or body art
establishment to the nearest property line of the site containing the existing
adult entertainment business.
   (C)   The tattoo establishment or body art establishment shall not be
located within 500 feet of any business selling alcoholic beverages for on
premise consumption as measured from any point from the outer boundaries of the
building lease space containing the tattoo establishment or body art
establishment to the nearest property line of the site containing the existing
business selling alcoholic beverages.
   (D)   The tattoo establishment or body art establishment shall not be
located within 100 feet of any business selling alcoholic beverages for off
premise consumption as measured from any point from the outer boundaries of the
building lease space containing the tattoo establishment or body art
establishment to the nearest property line of the site containing the existing
business selling alcoholic beverages.
   (E)   The tattoo establishment or body art establishment shall not be
located within 100 feet of any existing residential zone as measured from any
point from the outer boundaries of the building lease space containing the
tattoo establishment or body art establishment to the nearest property line of
a residentially zoned property.
   (F)   The tattoo establishment or body art establishment shall not be
located within 500 feet of a school, park, day care center or family day care
home as measured from any point between the outer boundaries of the lease space
containing the tattoo establishment or body art establishment to the nearest
property line of the school, park, day care center, or family day care home.
   (G)   All business activities of the tattoo establishment or body art
establishment shall take place entirely within the building and in compliance
with the requirements under the Stanislaus County Body Art Program established
under the requirements of Health and Safety Code, Chapter 7, commencing with
Section 119300.
(Ord. 2015-001, passed 2-24-15)
§ 125.06 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The Community Development Director shall annually establish hours of
operation for all tattoo establishments or body art establishments that
operated in the city.
(Ord. 2015-001, passed 2-24-15)
§ 125.07 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   In addition to any other procedures regarding the enforcement of this code,
or other local, state or federal law, a license issued under this chapter may
be revoked if any of the following provisions or requirements is violated:
   (A)   All offering of services and merchandise shall take place only within
the building. Should other retailers within a commercial center in which the
tattoo establishment or body art establishment is located complain about
harassment of customers, this is prima facie evidence of non-compliance with
this requirement to contain body art business activities.
   (B)   All tattooing and other body art activities shall take place in a room
or space that conceals the activity from the view of individuals outside the
business.
   (C)   The tattoo establishment or body art establishment must not jeopardize
or endanger the public health and safety of persons residing or working in the
surrounding area.
   (D)   The tattoo establishment or body art establishment shall not result in
repeated nuisance activities within the premises or in close proximity of the
premises. Nuisance activities include but are not limited to disturbing the
peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public,
harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public
urination, theft, assault, battery, acts of vandalism, excessive littering,
loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially late at
night or in the early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations,
lewd conduct, or police detentions and arrests.
   (E)   The tattoo establishment or body art establishment and each tattoo
artist or body art practitioner shall be in full compliance with the provision
of AB 300, the Safe Body Art Act, Health and Safety Code §§ 119300 et seq.
   (F)   The tattoo establishment or body art establishment and each tattoo
artist or body art practitioner shall meet all the requirements, health and
safety standards, and proper handling and disposal of medical waste as required
by the Stanislaus County Environmental Health Division under the Safe Body Art
Program.
   (G)   The tattoo establishment or body art establishment shall not violate
any other applicable local, state, or federal regulation.
   (H)   The tattoo establishment or body art establishment shall not allow the
sale of drug paraphernalia at the tattoo establishment.
(Ord. 2015-001, passed 2-24-15)
CHAPTER 126: SIDEWALK VENDING
Section
   
126.01   Purpose
   
126.02   Definitions
   
126.03   Permit required
   
126.04   Permit application
   
126.05   Permit issuance
   
126.06   Operating conditions
   
126.07   Prohibited activities
   
126.08   Vending locations
   
126.09   Public parks
   
126.10   Appeals
   
126.99   Penalties
126.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a permitting and
regulatory program for sidewalk vendors that complies with Senate Bill 946
(Chapter 459, Statutes 2018). The provisions of this chapter allow the city to
encourage small business activities by removing total prohibitions on portable
food stands and merchandise sales, while still permitting regulation and
enforcement of unpermitted sidewalk vending activities to protect the public’s
health, safety, and welfare.
   (B)   The City Council hereby finds that to promote the public’s health,
safety, and welfare, restrictions on sidewalk vending are necessary to:
      (1)   Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic including ingress into, or egress from, any residence, public
building, or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk, by persons
exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles;
      (2)   Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of sidewalks,
pathways, poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, firefighting
apparatus, mailboxes, as well as access to locations used for public
transportation services;
      (3)   Reduce exposure to the city for personal injury or property damage
claims and litigation; and
      (4)   Ensure sidewalk vending activities occur only in locations where
such activities would not restrict sidewalk and pathway access and enjoyment to
individuals with disabilities.
(Ord. 2019-006, passed 10-22-2019)
126.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, terms shall have the following meanings:
   CANNABIS. Shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and
Professions Code Section 26001(f) as it may be amended from time to time.
   CERTIFIED FARMERS’ MARKET. A location operated in accordance with Chapter
10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the California Food and
Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter.
   CITY. The City of Riverbank.
   CODE. The Riverbank Municipal Code.
   COUNTY. The County of Stanislaus.
   CURB FACE. The vertical or sloping surface on the roadway side of the curb.
   DIRECTOR. The City Manager or his or her designee.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE ACCESS. The roadway path or other surface that provides
police, fire, or other safety vehicle access from the dispatched point of
origin to a facility, building, parcel, park, or portion thereof. Emergency
vehicle access includes, but is not limited to, fire lanes, public and private
streets, parking lot lanes, access roadways, and walkways.
   FOOD. Any edible substance.
   GOODS OR MERCHANDISE. Any item that is not food.
   HEARING OFFICER. An impartial individual designated by the City Manager to
determine appeals pursuant to and in accordance with Section 126.
   HEATING ELEMENT. Any device used to create heat for food preparation.
   PARK. A public park owned and operated by the City.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. All property owned or controlled by the city, including,
but not limited to, alleys, parks, pathways, plazas, streets, parking lots,
sidewalks, and walking trails.
   RESIDENTIAL. Any area zoned exclusively as residential in
Chapter 153 of this Code.
   ROAMING SIDEWALK VENDOR. A sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and
stops only to complete a transaction.
   SIDEWALK. A public sidewalk or paved pedestrian path or walkway specifically
designed for pedestrian travel.
   SIDEWALK VENDOR. A person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart,
stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized
conveyance, or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian
path.
   SPECIAL EVENT. Any temporary permitted event approved by the City.
   STATIONARY SIDEWALK VENDOR. A sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed
location.
   VEND OR VENDING. To barter, exchange, sell, offer for sale, display for
sale, or solicit offers to purchase, food or merchandise, or to require someone
to negotiate, establish, or pay a fee before providing food or merchandise,
even if characterized as a donation.
   VENDOR. A person who vends.
   VENDING CART. A pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon,
showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance used for vending, that is not
a vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 2019-006, passed 10-22-2019)
126.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the business of vending on a
sidewalk or in a park without a sidewalk vending permit issued under the
provisions of this Chapter and a business license issued under the provisions
of Chapter 110 of this Code.
(Ord. 2019-006, passed 10-22-2019)
126.04 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every person, prior to engaging in, conducting, or carrying on the
business of vending on a sidewalk, shall file an application for a permit with
the Director of Public Works, accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee in
an amount established by resolution of the City Council. The application shall
be in a form prescribed by the Director and shall contain, at a minimum, the
following:
      (1)   The legal name, current mailing address and telephone number of the
applicant;
      (2)   If the applicant is an agent of an individual, company,
partnership, corporation, or other entity, the name and business address of the
principal;
      (3)   A copy of a California’s driver’s license or identification number,
an individual taxpayer identification number, or a social security number. The
number collected shall not be available to the public for inspection, is
confidential, and shall not be disclosed except as required to administer the
permit or comply with a state law or state or federal court order;
      (4)   The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all persons that
will be employed as a sidewalk vendor by the applicant;
      (5)   A description of the food and/or merchandise for vending;
      (6)   A description, map, or drawing of the areas in which the sidewalk
vendor proposes to operate;
      (7)   A description and photograph of any vending cart to be used in the
operation of the business;
      (8)   The hours per day and the days per week during which the sidewalk
vendor proposes to operate, and whether the sidewalk vendor intends to operate
as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor;
      (9)   Proof of comprehensive general liability insurance (one million
dollars per occurrence/ two million dollars aggregate) protecting the permittee
and the city from all claims against any injury, death, loss or damage as a
result of wrongful or negligent acts or omissions by the permittee. Such
insurance shall name as additional insured the city and shall provide that the
policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without
30 days advance written notice to the city;
      (10)   An agreement by the applicant to indemnify and hold harmless the
city, its officers and employees, for any claim, damages, actions, or causes of
action which may arise from or in any manner relate to the permit or the
vendor’s sidewalk vending activities;
      (11)   Food vendors must also comply with the following requirements:
         (a)   Provide the Director a copy of the certification of completion
of a county-approved food handler’s course and copies of all required approvals
from the county’s food safety program;
         (b)   Provide the Director a copy of a valid mobile food permit issued
by the Stanislaus County Department of Environmental Health;
         (c)   Indicate whether food is prepacked or to be prepared on site;
         (d)   Indicate whether the vendor requires a heating element to
prepare food.
      (12)   Certification by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the
information contained in the application is true to his or her knowledge and
belief; and
      (13)   Any other reasonable information required by the Director.
   (B)   Applications for permits shall be filed a minimum of 30 days prior to
the date requested for issuance of the permit. Renewal permit applications
shall be filed a minimum of 30 days prior to the expiration of any existing
permit.
(Ord. 2019-006, passed 10-22-2019)
126.05 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Not later than 30 days after the filing of a completed application for
a vendor’s permit, the applicant shall be notified of the decision on the
issuance or denial of the permit.
   (B)   The Director may issue a sidewalk vendor permit, with appropriate
conditions, if he or she finds based on all of the relevant information that:
      (1)   The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with
traffic or pedestrian movement, or tend to interfere with or endanger the
public peace or rights of nearby residents to the quiet and peaceable enjoyment
of their property, or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health,
safety or general welfare;
      (2)   The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not constitute a
fire hazard, and all proper safety precautions will be taken;
      (3)   The sidewalk vendor has paid all previous administrative fines,
completed all community service, and completed any other alternative
disposition associated in any way with a previous violation. The sidewalk
vendor has not had a permit revoked within the same calendar year;
      (4)   The sidewalk vendor’s application contains all required
information;
      (5)   The sidewalk vendor has not made a materially false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of fact to the city in the application process;
      (6)   The sidewalk vendor has satisfied all the requirements of this
chapter;
      (7)   The sidewalk vendor has paid all applicable fees as set by City
Council resolution.
   (C)   A sidewalk vendor permit is non-transferable. Any change in ownership
or operation of a sidewalk vendor or sidewalk vending cart requires a new
permit under this chapter.
   (D)   A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be effective for a
period of one year from the date of issuance.
(Ord. 2019-006, passed 10-22-2019)
126.06 OPERATING CONDITIONS.
   All sidewalk vendors are subject to the following operating conditions when
conducting sidewalk vending activities:
   (A)   All sidewalk vendor permits shall be displayed conspicuously at all
times on the vending cart or the sidewalk vendor’s person.
   (B)   Sidewalk vendors shall not leave their sidewalk vending cart
unattended. Sidewalk vending carts shall not be stored on public property.
   (C)   All sidewalk vendors shall allow a city police officer, firefighter,
or code enforcement officer, at any time, to inspect their sidewalk vending
cart for compliance with the size requirements of this chapter and to ensure
the safe operation of any heating elements used to prepare food.
   (D)   Every sidewalk vending cart shall not exceed a total length of six
feet, a total width of four feet, or a total height, including a roof,
umbrella, or awning of eight feet.
   (E)   No sidewalk vending cart shall be motorized.
   (F)   All food and merchandise shall be stored either inside or affixed to
the sidewalk vendor cart or carried by the sidewalk vendor. Food and
merchandise shall not be stored, placed, or kept on any public property. If
affixed to the sidewalk vendor cart, the overall space taken up by the sidewalk
vendor cart shall not exceed the size requirements provided in this section.
   (G)   Sidewalk vendors that sell food shall maintain a trash container in or
on their sidewalk vending cart and shall not empty their trash into public
trashcans. The size of the vendor’s trash container shall be taken into account
when assessing the total size limit of a sidewalk vending cart. Sidewalk
vendors shall not leave any location without first picking up, removing, and
disposing of all trash or refuse from their operation.
   (H)   Sidewalk vendors may not empty vending cart trash containers into any
city refuse container.
   (I)   Sidewalk vendors shall immediately clean up any food, grease, or other
fluid or item related to sidewalk vending activities that falls on public
property.
   (J)   Vending carts shall not be accompanied by accessories, including, but
not limited to, tables, chairs, benches, and umbrellas except that one chair
and one umbrella may be provided for the purpose of allowing the vendor or an
employee to be seated in shade.
   (K)   Sidewalk vendors shall maintain a minimum four foot clear accessible
path on the sidewalk, free from obstructions, including sidewalk vending carts,
and customer queuing area.
   (L)   Sidewalk vendors shall not approach persons to sell food or
merchandise and shall not interfere in any way with anyone engaged in an
activity to sell food or merchandise.
   (M)   Sidewalk vendors shall not play or operate any drum, radio, CD Player,
phonograph, cell phone, loud speaker, sound amplifier, car radio/CD or tape,
television, or similar sound-amplifying device, whether mobile or from a fixed
location upon the public streets, public rights-of-way, or in public parks.
   (N)   Sidewalk vendors shall not smoke or use tobacco or cannabis products
on any public property during their hours of operation, including during their
breaks and meals. Public property includes, but is not limited to public
streets, public rights-of-way, or in public parks.
(Ord. 2019-006, passed 10-22-2019)
126.07 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Sidewalk vendors shall comply with all operating conditions, including
those conditions set forth in §
92.50 (smoking restrictions),
Chapter 93 (noise regulations),
Chapter 94 (park regulations),
Chapter 114 (fortune-telling regulations),
Chapter 118 (adult entertainment regulations),
Chapter 119 (massage regulations),
Chapter 120 (cannabis regulations),
Chapter 123 (tobacco and e-cigarette regulations),
Chapter 125 (tattoo regulations), and
Chapter 153 (alcohol regulations) of this Code.
   (B)   Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in any of the following activities:
      (1)   Renting merchandise to customers;
      (2)   Displaying merchandise or food that is not available for immediate
sale;
      (3)   Selling of gun, adult-oriented material, cannabis, alcohol,
tobacco, or electronic cigarette products;
      (4)   Offering services such as fortune-telling, massage, and tattoos;
      (5)   In areas not zoned exclusively for residential use, all sidewalk
vendors are prohibited from conducting sidewalk vending activities between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily, except that the hours of operation
shall not be more restrictive than the hours of operation imposed on other
businesses or uses on the same street;
      (6)   In areas zoned exclusively for residential use, roaming sidewalk
vendors are prohibited from conducting sidewalk vending activities between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. daily;
      (7)   Knowingly making false statements or misrepresentations during the
course of offering food or merchandise for sale;
      (8)   Impeding or obstructing ingress to or egress from any private
property or any structure, parking space or loading facility;
      (9)   Selling or otherwise conducting transactions with persons in moving
vehicles or vehicles illegally parked or stopped;
      (10)   Causing vehicles to stop in traffic lanes or causing persons to
stand in traffic lanes or parking spaces;
      (11)   Vending in a manner that blocks or obstructs the free movement of
vehicles, including parked vehicles;
      (12)   Damaging public or private property, including trees, shrubs,
grass, flowers, plants, or vegetation.
(Ord. 2019-006, passed 10-22-2019)
126.08 VENDING LOCATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Stationary sidewalk vending is prohibited in the following
areas:
      (2)   Any residential zone in the city.
   (B)   Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities at
the following locations:
      (1)   On any private property without the express written consent of the
owner or lessee of the property.
      (2)   On any designated emergency vehicle access way.
      (3)   Within 12 inches of any curb face on all roads.
      (4)   Within 15 feet of any entrance or exit to a building, structure or
facility.
      (5)   Within 50 feet of another sidewalk vendor.
      (6)   Within 25 feet of a:
         (a)   Fire hydrant;
         (b)   Curb which has been designated as yellow or red zone, or a bus
zone;
         (c)   Trash or recycling containers, bike racks, benches, bus stops,
or similar public use items.
      (7)   On any sidewalk where vending equipment and queuing patrons would
restrict access requirements under the Americans with Disabilities Act.
      (8)   Within 200 feet of a permitted certified farmers’ market or swap
meet during the limited operating hours of that certified farmers’ market or
swap meet.
      (9)   Within the immediate vicinity of an area designated for a special
event permit issued by the city, during the limited duration of the special
permit. If the city provides any notice, business interruption mitigation, or
other rights to affected businesses or property owners under the city’s special
permit, such notice will also be provided to any sidewalk vendors specifically
permitted to operate in the area, if applicable.
   (C)   Locations for vending shall be approved by the Director. In addition
to any restrictions provided by this section, vending locations may be further
limited by the Director only if the limitation is directly related to objective
health, safety or welfare concerns, including but not limited to:
      (1)   The ability of the site to safely accommodate the use;
      (2)   Pedestrian safety.
   (D)   Vending locations may change only upon written request by an applicant
and written approval by the Director.
(Ord. 2019-006, passed 10-22-2019)
126.09 PUBLIC PARKS.
   In addition to the conditions, restrictions, and prohibited activities
provided in §
92.50 (smoking restrictions),
Chapter 93 (noise regulations),
Chapter 94 (park regulations),
Chapter 114 (fortune-telling regulations),
Chapter 118 (adult entertainment regulations),
Chapter 119 (massage regulations),
Chapter 120 (cannabis regulations),
Chapter 123 (tobacco and e-cigarette regulations),
Chapter 125 (tattoo regulations), and
Chapter 153 (alcohol regulations) of this Code, sidewalk vendors operating in a
public park shall not:
   (A)   Operate outside the park’s hours of operation;
   (B)   Operate on, or within 25 feet of, any sports field or playground
equipment area;
   (C)   Utilize any bench, table, barbeque pit, covered gathering area, or
other publicly-owned structure or amenity in the park in any way as part of the
sidewalk vending operation;
   (D)   Operate within 25 feet of any bench, table, barbeque pit, covered
gathering area, or other publicly-owned structure or amenity in the park;
   (E)   A stationary sidewalk vendor shall not sell food or merchandise or
engage in any sidewalk vending activities at any park where the city has signed
an agreement for concessions that exclusively permits the sale of food or
merchandise by a concessionaire, while the concessionaire is in operation.
(Ord. 2019-006, passed 10-22-2019)
126.10 APPEALS.
   (A)   Decisions to deny an application for a permit may be appealed by any
interested person. Appeals shall be heard and determined by the hearing
officer.
   (B)   Appeals shall be initiated within 21 calendar days of the decision to
deny an application for a permit.
   (C)   Appeals of decisions to deny an application for a permit shall be made
in writing to the hearing officer on forms provided by the city. The appeal
shall state the facts and basis for the appeal.
   (D)   Appeals of a decision to deny an application for a permit shall be
accompanied by a fee which is 50% of the cost of the permit.
   (E)   An appeal shall be scheduled for a hearing before the hearing officer
within 30 calendar days of the filing of the appeal unless both the appellant
and the hearing officer consent to a later date.
   (F)   The hearing officer shall give notice in writing to the appellant of
the time and location of the appeal hearing. At the hearing, the hearing
officer shall review the record of the decision and hear testimony of the
appellant, if any, the applicant and any other interested party. The appeal
shall be reviewed and determined on a de novo basis.
   (G)   After the hearing, the hearing officer shall affirm, modify or reverse
the original decision to deny an application for a permit. When a decision is
modified or reversed, the hearing officer shall state the specific reasons for
modification or reversal. Decisions on appeals shall be rendered within 30
calendar days of the close of the hearing. The hearing officer shall mail
notice of a decision to the appellant. Such notice shall be mailed within five
working days after the date of the decision to the appellant. The decision of
the hearing officer shall be final.
(Ord. 2019-006, passed 10-22-2019)
126.99 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Violations of this chapter shall not be prosecuted as infractions or
misdemeanors and shall only be punished by the following administrative fine
and rescission provisions:
      (1)   An administrative fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation;
      (2)   An administrative fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation
within one year of the first violation; and
      (3)   An administrative fine not exceeding $500 for each additional
violation within one year of the first violation.
   (B)   If a sidewalk vendor violates any portion of this chapter and cannot
present the citing officer with a proof of a valid permit, the sidewalk vendor
may be punished by:
      (1)   An administrative fine not exceeding $250 for a first violation;
      (2)   An administrative fine not exceeding $500 for a second violation
within one year of the first violation; and
      (3)   An administrative fine not exceeding $1,000 for each additional
violation within one year of the first violation.
   (C)   Upon proof of a valid permit issued by the city, the administrative
fines set forth in division (B) shall be reduced to the administrative fines
set forth in division (A), or any successor sections.
   (D)   The Director may rescind a permit issued to a sidewalk vendor for the
term of that permit upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations.
   (E)   The Director may deny, suspend, or revoke any permit for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   Fraud or misrepresentation contained in the application for the
permit;
      (2)   Fraud or misrepresentation made in the course of carrying on the
business of vending;
      (3)   Conduct of the permitted business in such manner as to create a
public nuisance, or constitute a danger to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
   (F)   Denial, void, or revocation of the business license shall result in
revocation of the vendor permit.
   (G)   Administrative fines shall be imposed and enforced pursuant to Chapter
99 of the Municipal Code of Riverbank.
   (H)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city from
commencement of any available administrative, civil and/or criminal provisions
of law as an alternative and/or in addition to the enforcement proceedings set
forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2019-006, passed 10-22-2019)
CHAPTER 127. HEMP CULTIVATION
Section
   
127.01   Definitions
   
127.05   Cultivation
§ 127.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The California Industrial Hemp Advisory Board.
   COMMERCIAL HEMP ACTIVITY. This shall mean cultivation, possession,
manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, delivery
transport, distribution, or sale of hemp or a hemp product, and other similar
activities defined under Business & Professions Code § 19300.5, as amended from
time to time.
   COMMISSIONER. The Stanislaus County Agricultural Commissioner.
   CULTIVATION. This shall mean any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of industrial hemp.
   ESTABLISHED AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTION. This shall mean any
institution that is either:
      (1)   A public or private institution or organization that maintains land
or facilities for agricultural research, including colleges, universities,
agricultural research centers, and conservation research centers; or
      (2)   An institution of higher education (as defined in Section 1001 of
the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001) that grows, cultivates, or
manufactures industrial hemp for the purposes research conducted under an
agricultural pilot program or other agricultural or academic research.
   INDUSTRIAL HEMP (OR HEMP). This shall have the same meaning as that term
defined in § 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.
   OUTDOOR CULTIVATION. This shall mean cultivation of plants that are not
grown within a fully enclosed and secure structure, and where such plants rely
primarily on the sun for photosynthesis.
   SECRETARY. The California Secretary of Food and Agriculture.
   SEED BREEDER. This shall mean an individual or public or private institution
or organization that is registered with the Stanislaus County Agricultural
Commissioner to develop seed cultivars intended for sale or research.
   SEED CULTIVAR. This shall mean a variety of industrial hemp.
   SEED DEVELOPMENT PLAN. This shall mean a strategy devised by a seed breeder,
or applicant seed breeder, detailing his or her planned approach to growing and
developing a new seed cultivar for industrial hemp.
(Ord. 2020-002, passed 2-11-20)
§ 127.05 CULTIVATION.
   Outdoor cultivation of industrial hemp is expressly prohibited in all zones
and planned development areas in the City of Riverbank, and no permit shall be
issued therefore. No person shall establish, engage in, conduct, or allow
industrial hemp to be cultivated outdoors anywhere within the city.
(Ord. 2020-002, passed 2-11-20)
CHAPTER 128: MOBILE FOOD VENDING PROGRAM
Section
General Provisions
   
128.01   Title and purpose
   
128.02   Definitions
   
128.03   Administrative regulations
   
128.04   Permit required
   
128.05   Conflicting provisions
   
128.06   Permitted area
   
128.07   Transferability of a mobile food vending permit
   
128.08   Mobile food vending permit not a land use entitlement
   
128.09   Maximum number of mobile food vending permits
   
128.10   Application requirements for all mobile food vending permits
   
128.11   Additional applications requirements for group sites
   
128.12   Decisions regarding the approval, approval with conditions, or denial
of a food vending permit
   
128.13   Inspections required prior to legal operation
   
128.14   Mobile food vending permit expiration and renewal
Standards and Requirements
   
128.25   Hours of operation
   
128.26   Appearance and operating standards
   
128.27   Additional operational standards for ice cream trucks
   
128.28   Liability and indemnification
Enforcement, Revocation and Abatement
   
128.40   Enforcement
   
128.41   Violation
   
128.42   Responsibility
   
128.43   Appeals
   
128.44   Abatement generally
   
128.45   Notice to abate
   
128.46   Violations constituting infractions
   
128.47   Remedies are cumulative
 
   
128.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 128.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter shall be known as the Mobile Food Vending Program and
establishes regulations for a citywide mobile food vending program in
Riverbank.
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the mobile vending of food
and food products from food vending vehicles on public and private property
throughout the city in such a manner as to bring convenience, economic
vitality, and pedestrian activity to these areas. This includes protecting the
health, safety, and general welfare of the Riverbank community and customers
through appropriate regulation by requiring that new and existing mobile food
vendors provide the community and customers with a minimum level of
cleanliness, quality and security.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. The responsible party who seeks a mobile food vending permit from
the City of Riverbank.
   ASSEMBLY AREA. An indoor or outdoor place where people may gather for any
permitted purpose.
   GROUP SITE or GROUP SITE FOOD VENDING. The stationary operation of two or
more mobile food vending vehicles clustered together on a single site and
operating at the same time.
   GROUP SITE MOBILE FOOD VENDING PERMIT or GROUP SITE PERMIT (GSP). A mobile
food vending permit for a group site.
   GROUP SITE MOBILE FOOD VENDING VEHICLE or GROUP SITE VENDING VEHICLE (GSVV).
A food vending vehicle that is operating at a GROUP SITE.
   GROUP SITE ORGANIZER or RESPONSIBLE PARTY. For the purpose of determining
liability for damage to city or public facilities as a result of a group site
operation, the individual or legal entity who is directly responsible for
organizing and/or conducting the group site and/or the facility manager, and
his or her respective designees.
   INDIVIDUAL FOOD VENDING PERMIT or INDIVIDUAL VENDING PERMIT (IVP). A mobile
food vending permit for an individual food vending vehicle.
   INDIVIDUAL MOBILE FOOD VENDING VEHICLE or INDIVIDUAL VENDING VEHICLE (IVV).
A mobile food vending vehicle that is not operating at a group site.
   MOBILE CAFÉ. A motorized food vending vehicle that serves coffee and tea
drinks and pre-made pastries, and does not have cooking equipment.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDING PERMIT. The City of Riverbank's annual or temporary
permit required to place, operate, maintain, or allow an individual food
vending vehicle or group site within the Riverbank City limits.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDING VEHICLE. A truck, trailer, or other motorized vehicle
from which food vending services. This definition only applies to motorized
vehicles and food preparation trailers made to be pulled by a motorized
vehicle.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. A person who is engaged in "mobile food vending" from a
vehicle as governed by this chapter.
   NON-FOOD MERCHANDISE. Goods, wares, or non-food merchandise.
   PUSHCART. A type of non-motorized food vending vehicle that, because of its
small size and operable wheels, can be easily moved by a person during hours of
operation. This definition may also include a food vending vehicle integrated
or pulled by non-motorized, pedal-powered vehicle such as a bicycle or
tricycle. Pushcarts are not regulated by this chapter.
   PUSHCART FOOD VENDOR. A person who owns and operates a business vending from
a pushcart.
   ROAMING. The movement of a food vending vehicle to multiple locations during
vending hours.
   SCHOOL. Any public, charter, or private school serving children between
kindergarten and high school. For the purposes of this chapter, pre-schools,
community colleges and universities are not included in this definition.
   SITE. The specific public or private property location, including any public
right-of-way, for which an applicant or responsible party has been issued a
mobile food vending permit.
   STATIONARY. A mobile food vending vehicle which does not move during vending
hours.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.03 ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.
   The City Manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized to adopt rules and
regulations consistent with this chapter as needed to implement this chapter,
subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney, and to develop all
related forms and/or other materials and take other steps as needed to
implement this chapter and make such interpretations of this chapter as he or
she may consider necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as may be allowed by another chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any individual, group, or legal entity to sell, offer for sale, or solicit
offers to purchase food from mobile food vending vehicles in the City of
Riverbank without first obtaining a mobile food vending permit as specified in
this chapter. Conducting a mobile food vending operation in the City of
Riverbank without such a valid form of city permission is a public nuisance, as
defined in this code.
   (B)   Any individual, group, or legal entity desiring to engage in mobile
food vending in the city shall first file an application with the Community
Development Director pursuant to procedures established in this chapter.
   (C)   Issuance of an encroachment permit from the City of Riverbank is not
required to operate an individual food vending vehicle or group site in the
public right-of-way.
   (D)   Any individual, group, or legal entity desiring to engage in mobile
food vending shall obtain and maintain all required permits from Stanislaus
County Environmental Health and the City of Riverbank, and other regulatory
agencies, including, but not limited to electrical permits, business permits or
Stanislaus County Consolidated Fire District permits.
   (E)   Upon demand of a peace officer or city employee authorized to enforce
this chapter, a person operating a mobile food vending vehicle shall present
the vehicle permit that is in effect for that vehicle.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.05 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   Where a conflict exists between the regulations or requirements in this
chapter and applicable regulations or requirements contained in other chapters
and titles of the Riverbank Municipal Code, including but not limited to the
Riverbank Zoning Code (Title 15), the applicable regulations or requirements in
this chapter shall prevail.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.06 PERMITTED AREA.
   Individual food vending vehicles and group sites shall be subject to the
following location requirements:
   (A)   Mobile food vending shall only be located in areas approved by the
Community Development Director, and may be located on private property, on
publicly owned property, or in the public right-of-way. Food vending in the
street right-of-way is restricted to the perimeter of city parks and in the
Downtown Specific Plan area during special events.
   (B)   A location for an individual mobile food vending vehicle or group site
shall not be permitted if it is proposed to be closer than the following
distances:
      (1)   Mobile food vending within 300 feet from the parcel boundary of a
public or private school serving children between kindergarten and high school
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
      (2)   Mobile food vending within 350 feet of any building-enclosed
restaurant as measured from the primary customer entrance of the restaurant,
except when the mobile food vendor has written authorization from all building-
enclosed restaurants that are within that same 350-foot radius.
      (3)   Any additional location requirements, as determined by the
Community Development Director, or his or her designee.
   (C)   Individual food vending vehicles or group sites cannot block or impede
access to:
      (1)   Required parking or driveways;
      (2)   Bicycle racks;
      (3)   Signal crossings;
      (4)   Required off-street parking;
      (5)   Parking meters;
      (6)   Pedestrian or bicycle routes;
      (7)   Emergency vehicle routes;
      (8)   Building entrances and exits;
      (9)   Required accessibility routes and curb cuts;
      (10)   Easements;
      (11)   Trash enclosure areas or access to trash bins/trash enclosures; or
      (12)   City facilities, as determined by the Community Development
Director, or his or her designee.
   (D)   Individual food vending vehicles and group sites shall maintain site
circulation and access consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA).
   (E)   Each individual vending vehicle (IVV) and group site vending vehicle
(GSVV) on private property shall be located within 200 feet of a restroom
facility that employees can legally access and a trash enclose that they have
permission to use.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.07 TRANSFERABILITY OF A MOBILE FOOD VENDING PERMIT.
   A mobile food vending permit is not property and shall have no value. A
mobile food vending permit cannot be transferred, conveyed or otherwise
assigned in any manner to another person or entity, including new owners in a
corporation or partnership, without written permission from the Community
Development Director or his or her designee.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.08 MOBILE FOOD VENDING PERMIT NOT A LAND USE ENTITLEMENT.
   No city action related to issuance or renewal of a mobile food vending
permit for an individual food vendor or a group site shall be interpreted to
confer any form of permanent land use entitlement to the person, group, entity,
or property associated with such permit.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.09 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF MOBILE FOOD VENDING PERMITS.
   A maximum number for the different types of mobile food vending permits
which may be issued may be determined and set by the City Manager and if set,
reviewed annually. At no time shall more than the maximum number of the
specified types of mobile food vending permits be active.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.10 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL MOBILE FOOD VENDING PERMITS.
   Application for an individual food vending permit shall be made by the owner
of the food vending vehicle, or his or her authorized agent, or in the case of
a group site food vending permit, by the group site organizer, or his or her
authorized agent, on a form prescribed by Community Development Director. Each
application for an individual or group site food vending permit shall include:
   (A)   Name, phone number, address and copy of a photo ID of the applicant,
vehicle owner and all persons directly or indirectly interested in the conduct
of such business, including all members of any firm or partnership. A corporate
applicant shall provide the name, phone number, address and copy of a photo ID
of the officers, directors and principal owners, including all owners of 10% or
more of the corporate stock;
   (B)   Completed City of Riverbank Business License Application with
attachments;
   (C)   A non-refundable business license application fee in an amount of as
set by the City Council;
   (D)   A nonrefundable application fee for a mobile food vending permit, as
set by the City Council;
   (E)   The location at which the applicant proposes to conduct the business;
   (F)   If proposed location is on private property, written consent in a form
approved by the city from the property owner (if other than self) permitting
the individual food vending facility or group site to locate on the property;
or, if owned by applicant, proof of ownership;
   (G)   A map or illustration, showing:
      (1)   The proposed location or specific parking space upon the street;
      (2)   The address and Assessor's Parcel Number of the parcel or nearest
parcel.
   (H)   A site plan for the proposed location, containing:
      (1)   If on a parcel, the location and dimensions of all proposed food
vending vehicle(s), any public seating or other site amenities (including
chairs and tables), buildings or other structures on site, paved areas,
driveways, trash receptacles, garages, parking spaces, maneuvering aisles, and
pavement striping;
      (2)   If upon the street, location and dimensions of the proposed food
vending vehicle, sidewalks, curb cuts, trash receptacles, and obstructions such
as telecommunication boxes, street trees, and light poles.
   (I)   Photographs of the site and food vending vehicle(s);
   (J)   Sample, photo, or rendering of proposed signs;
   (K)   The type of foods, wares or merchandise to be sold;
   (L)   Proof of all required approvals from Stanislaus County Environmental
Health for the proposed food vending vehicle(s) and/or group site;
   (M)   Proof that the food vendor(s) and, if applicable, group site
organizer, has a valid City of Riverbank Business License;
   (N)   The proposed hours of operation for the individual food vending
vehicle or group site, including dates, and starting and ending times of the
vending period;
   (O)   Maintenance plan, including litter pickup and cleaning in the vicinity
of the individual food vending vehicle or group site;
   (P)   The address where the food vending vehicle(s) will be stored and
serviced during non-operating hours;
   (Q)   The following information shall be provided regarding the commercial
kitchen or commissary to be used by the applicant, if any:
      (1)   Proof of all required approvals from Stanislaus County
Environmental Health;
      (2)   A valid lease between the vehicle and/or business owner(s) and a
commercial kitchen or commissary.
   (R)   Whether the applicant has at any time been convicted of a felony or of
any offense involving moral turpitude or has been convicted of any narcotics
violation;
   (S)   Whether or not any permit or license heretofore granted to applicant
to engage in any business or to do any act within the city or elsewhere has
been revoked or denied, and, if so, circumstances surrounding the revocation or
denial;
   (T)   A signed statement from the applicant that they will abide by all
local, state and federal requirements, including, but not limited to, those
relating to the minimum wage and sick leave;
   (U)   Proof of liability insurance in the amount required by the city; and
   (V)   Any other reasonable information regarding the identity and character
of the applicant or applicant’s employees, the location proposed or the nature
of the business that the Community Development Director, or his or her
designee, requires to evaluate the proposal.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.11 ADDITIONAL APPLICATIONS REQUIREMENTS FOR GROUP SITES.
   The application for a group site food vending permit shall include the items
in §
128.10, and the following additional information:
   (A)   Legal and business name and mailing address for each food vendor; and
   (B)   Designation of a manager to be responsible for the day-to-day site
management of the group site.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.12 DECISIONS REGARDING THE APPROVAL, APPROVAL WITH CONDITIONS, OR DENIAL
OF A FOOD VENDING PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   The Community Development Director, or his or her designee,
shall determine whether the proposal meets the requirements for a mobile food
vending permit as set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   The Community Development Director, or his or her designee, shall
review and issue mobile food vending permits in the following order of
priority:
         (a)   Priority group one: Vendors with valid, unexpired Riverbank
Administrative Use Permits on private property;
         (b)   Priority group two: Vendors with valid, unexpired Riverbank
Temporary Use Permits in the street right-of-way, adjacent to city parks; and
         (c)   Priority group three: All other vending applicants.
   (B)   Decision by the Community Development Director. The Community
Development Director or, his or her designee, shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a mobile food vending permit application based on the
standards and criteria set forth in this chapter. The Community Development
Director, or his or her designee may impose conditions of approval on a mobile
food vending permit in the exercise of his or her reasonable discretion. The
applicant shall be notified of any conditions of approval in writing.
   (C)   A mobile food vending permit application may be denied if in his or
her opinion:
      (1)   Information contained in the application, or supplementary
information requested from the applicant, is false in any material detail;
      (2)   The applicant has failed to ensure conformity with the operating
standards or permitted area location requirements in this chapter;
      (3)   The applicant has failed to provide a complete application form
after having been notified of the requirement of producing additional
information or documents;
      (4)   The applicant has previously been cited by the City of Riverbank
for causing a public nuisance, or causing an unlawful or criminal activity
during the operation of a food vending activity;
      (5)   The applicant has previously had a food vending permit revoked in
Riverbank or in another jurisdiction, for violating food vending permit
conditions or for unlawful conduct relating thereto;
      (6)   The applicant has been convicted of a felony or of any offense
involving moral turpitude or has been convicted of any narcotics violation; or
      (7)   The granting of the food vending permit will have an adverse impact
upon the public health, safety, or order.
   (D)   Prior to the issuance of any permit under this chapter, the applicant
shall pay to the city any business operations tax required by §
110.18.
   (E)   Decisions of the Community Development Director, or his or her
designee, relating to the granting or denial of any application for a mobile
food vendor’s permit shall be rendered in writing.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.13 INSPECTIONS REQUIRED PRIOR TO LEGAL OPERATION.
   The applicant shall not commence business activities until:
   (A)   A Stanislaus Consolidated Fire District designee and City of Riverbank
Building Inspector have inspected all food vending vehicles and locations for
safety before a Riverbank Business License has been issued.
   (B)   Once the mobile food vending vehicle or group site has passed all
required inspections and can legally operate, the applicant shall affix an
issued City of Riverbank Mobile Food Vending Permit in a clearly visible
location within the IVV, or display such permit at a prominent place at a group
site. The City of Riverbank Mobile Food Vending Permit shall contain the permit
number, the expiration date, and a map showing the permitted location of the
individual food vending vehicle or group site.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.14 MOBILE FOOD VENDING PERMIT EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   All mobile food vending permits shall run concurrently with a City of
Riverbank Business License.
   (B)   A permitee may file an application for renewal of a mobile food permit
with the Community Development Director at any time prior to the expiration of
a mobile food vending permit. Renewal applications shall contain information
provided by §§
128.10 and
128.11 and any additional information required by Community Development
Director, or his or her designee. Renewal applications shall be accompanied by
a nonrefundable renewal application fee in an amount established by the City
Council. Renewal applications may be approved or denied in accordance with
provisions of §
128.12. Renewals are in effect from January 1 through December 31.
   (C)   Initial permits may be obtained in any quarter of a calendar year but
all permits expire on December 31.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 128.25 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   The regular permitted hours of operation for all individual food
vending vehicles are 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., daily. Individual food vending
vehicles may only remain open as long as the primary business on their site
remains open. The City Manager, or his or her designee, may grant an exception
and authorize individual food vending after the closure of the primary
business, if the owner of the food vending business is also the owner of the
primary business on site and has access to the restroom facilities after the
primary business is closed. In no case shall vending occur between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (B)   For group sites, the specific hours of operation shall be determined
by the City Manager, or his or her designee, based on the proximity of the
group site to noise and traffic sensitive uses such as residential units,
schools, and churches. Vending shall not occur between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. unless permission is granted for a special event by the City
Manager.
   (C)   For food vending vehicles within city parks or connected to city
events, the hours of operation shall be determined by the Director of Parks and
Recreation.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.26 APPEARANCE AND OPERATING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Appearance and condition of the mobile food vending vehicle.
      (1)   All mobile food vending vehicles and group sites shall clearly
display a current City of Riverbank business license, City of Riverbank Mobile
Food Vending Permit, and Stanislaus County Environmental Health permit in plain
view and at all times on the mobile food vending vehicle or at the group site.
      (2)   No more than three signs shall be attached to any food vending
facility, with a maximum aggregate display surface of 30 square feet of signage
per food vending vehicle.
   (B)   Utilities. Individual food vending vehicles and group sites shall
either be entirely self-sufficient in regards to gas, electricity, water, and
telecommunications, or the food vending vehicle shall be required to apply for
appropriate permits for any utility hook-ups or connections to on-site
utilities to ensure building and public safety and consistency with applicable
building codes.
   (C)   Refuse, trash and litter maintenance.
      (1)   The food vending facility or group site organizer shall not throw,
deposit, discharge, leave, or permit to be thrown, deposited, discharged, or
left, any fat, oil, grease, refuse, garbage, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk,
gutter, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structure,
or upon any public or private lot of land in the city, so that the same might
be or become a pollutant.
      (2)   A minimum of one 32-gallon litter receptacle shall be within 15
feet of each individual food vending vehicle for customers and employees.
      (3)   Individual food vending vehicles and group site organizers shall
maintain the subject site and adjacent public right-of-way free of litter on
and within 100 feet of their site.
      (4)   At a minimum, all refuse shall be removed from the individual food
vending vehicle location or group site, and properly disposed of after each
vending period.
      (5)   Failure to adequately clean up after a food vending operation date
shall be grounds for denying an applicant's request for permit renewal as set
forth in §
128.12(C).
   (D)   Seating, chairs and tables. Depending on site size, configuration and
location, a plan for site amenities, including but not limited to tables and
chairs, portable restroom facilities, or temporary shade structures, may be
permitted in conjunction with the operation of a mobile food vending site. A
site plan depicting the proposed location of any site amenities shall be
submitted for review and approval in conjunction with a food vending permit
application.
   (E)   Performance standards.
      (1)   Vendors shall not play or operate any drum, radio, CD player,
phonograph, cell phone, loud speaker, sound amplifier, car radio/CD or tape,
television, or similar sound-amplifying device, whether mobile or from a fixed
location upon the public streets, public rights-of-way, or in public parks.
      (2)   Noise levels from food vending vehicles shall not exceed the city's
noise ordinance standards. Vendors should use low-noise emission generators.
      (3)   Odors from food vending vehicles shall be contained within
immediate area of the permitted food vending location.
      (4)   The food vending vehicle and site amenities shall remain free of
tobacco and cannabis smoke, vaping included. A notice to the public shall be
posted on the vehicle and enforced by the vendor.
   (F)   Security.
      (1)   Mobile food vendors shall not operate in an unsafe manner,
including but not limited to impeding on- or off-site vehicle circulation and
obstructing the view of pedestrian by motorists.
      (2)   The site shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner at all
times.
      (3)   Food vending vehicles and group sites shall have adequate lighting
to ensure customer safety. Lighting shall be directed downwards and away from
public streets and adjacent properties.
      (4)   Mobile food vendors shall not use or permit use of parking spaces
on the site (e.g., for customer queuing, tables, chairs, portable restrooms,
signs, and any other ancillary equipment) if doing so will adversely affect the
required off-street parking available for primary use(s) of the site during
peak periods as determined by the Community Development Director.
      (5)   Mobile food vendors shall not stop, stand, or park in any clear
vision triangle or no parking zone.
   (G)   Other requirements.
      (1)   All mobile food vendors shall comply with all applicable laws.
      (2)   Food vending facilities shall be maintained in operating condition
at all times, and shall be movable at all times. Food vending vehicles are not
permitted to remain at their site between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      (3)   No food vending vehicle shall become a permanent fixture on a site
and shall not be considered an improvement to real property.
      (4)   The food vendor shall maintain a valid Stanislaus County
Environmental Health Permit at all times. If the permit expires, or is
suspended or revoked, then all food sales shall cease until the permit is
reinstated.
      (5)   The group site organizer, or his or her representative, shall be
personally present at all times during group site operations.
      (6)   Proof of liability insurance as required by the City Manager shall
be maintained by the individual food vendor or group site organizer.
      (7)   The individual food vendor or group site organizer shall have a
working telephone where he or she can be reached directly at all times during
food vending.
      (8)   Group vending sites shall be paved. Individual food vending sites
are encouraged to be paved. If an individual food vending site has been in
operation for at least three years and is not paved, it shall be paved before
the permit renewal is approved for the fourth year.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.27 ADDITIONAL OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR ICE CREAM TRUCKS.
   Standards for ice cream trucks shall be governed under Cal. Vehicle Code §
22456. Ice cream trucks shall also comply with all requirements of this
chapter. To the extent that this chapter is more restrictive, it shall
supersede the requirements of Cal. Vehicle Code § 22456.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.28 LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   To the fullest extent permitted by law, any actions taken by a public
officer or employee under the provisions of this chapter shall not become a
personal liability of any public officer or employee of the city.
   (B)   To the maximum extent permitted by law, the permittees under this
chapter shall defend (with counsel acceptable to the city), indemnify and hold
harmless the City of Riverbank, the Riverbank City Council, the Riverbank
Planning Commission, and their respective officials, officers, employees,
representatives, agents and volunteers (hereafter collectively called "city")
from any liability, damages, actions, claims, demands, litigation, loss (direct
or indirect), causes of action, proceedings or judgment (including legal costs,
attorneys' fees, expert witness or consultant fees, City Attorney or staff
time, expenses or costs) (collectively called "action") against the city to
attack, set aside, void or annul, any food vending-related approvals and
actions or implementation of such approvals and actions, including conditions
of approval, if any. The city may elect, in its sole discretion, to participate
in the defense of said action and the permittee shall reimburse the city for
its reasonable legal costs and attorneys' fees.
   (C)   Within ten calendar days of the service of the pleadings upon the city
of any action as specified in division (B) above, the permittee shall execute a
Letter of Agreement with the city, acceptable to the City Attorney, which
memorializes the above obligations. These obligations and the Letter of
Agreement shall survive termination, extinguishment or invalidation of the food
vending-related approval. Failure to timely execute the Letter of Agreement
does not relieve the permittee of any of the obligations contained in this
section or any other requirements or performance or operating standards that
may be imposed by the city.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
ENFORCEMENT, REVOCATION AND ABATEMENT
§ 128.40 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Manager, or his or her designee shall be responsible for enforcing
this chapter. If periodic inspections are necessary to monitor compliance,
reinspection fees per the Master Fee Schedule shall be assessed against the
responsible party.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.41 VIOLATION.
   Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is declared to
be prima facie evidence of an existing violation, a continuing blight and a
declared public nuisance and shall be abated by the City Manager or his or her
designee, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any person in
violation will be subject to administrative penalties, citations, civil action
or other legal remedies, including seizure of a mobile food vending vehicle, or
food and drink merchandise.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.42 RESPONSIBILITY.
   If a mobile food vending vehicle is on a privately owned parcel, the parcel
owner and the individual food vending vehicle or group site organizer have
joint and several liability for compliance with this chapter, including fees,
administrative citations, civil actions, or legal remedies relating to an
individual food vending vehicle or group site. The parcel owner remains liable
for any violation of duties imposed by this chapter even if the parcel owner
has, by agreement, imposed on the individual food vending vehicle or group site
organizer the duty of complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.43 APPEALS.
   (A)   Decisions to deny an application for a permit or renewal of a permit
may be appealed by any interested person. Appeals shall be heard and determined
by the Appeals Board.
   (B)   An appeal shall be initiated within 21 calendar days of the decision
to deny an application for a permit.
   (C)   Appeals of decisions to deny an application for a permit shall be made
in writing to the Appeals Board on forms provided by the City Clerk. The appeal
shall state the facts and basis for the appeal.
   (D)   Appeals of a decision to deny an application for a permit or renewal
of a permit shall be accompanied by a fee which is 50% of the cost of the
permit or renewal of the permit.
   (E)   An appeal shall be scheduled for a hearing before the Appeals Board
within 30 calendar days of the filing of the appeal unless both the appellant
and the City Clerk consent to a later date.
   (F)   The City Clerk shall give notice in writing to the appellant of the
time and the location of the appeal hearing. At the hearing, the Appeals Board
shall review the record of the decision and hear testimony of the appellant, if
any, the applicant, and any other interested party. The appeal shall be
reviewed and determined on a de novo basis.
   (G)   After the hearing, the Appeals Board shall affirm, modify, or reverse
the original decision to deny an application for a permit or renewal of a
permit. When a decision is modified or reversed, the Appeals Board shall state
the specific reasons for modification or reversal. The City Clerk shall serve
personally or by certified mail the notice of decision to the appellant.
   (H)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, may revoke any mobile food
vending permit at any time if it is found that the activity is violating any of
the provisions of the City of Riverbank Municipal Code or causing a public
nuisance, in accordance with
Chapter 98 for:
      (1)   Violating any of the required operating standards set forth in §§
128.25 through
128.28 Standards and Requirements;
      (2)   Violating any of the imposed permit conditions after one written
warning; or
      (3)   Causing a public nuisance, or causing an unlawful or criminal
activity occurring during the operation of a food vending activity or group
site; or any other violation of this chapter.
   (I)   No mobile food vending permit shall be revoked until after a hearing
before the City Council. However, if the City Manager determines, in his or her
sole discretion, a suspension of a mobile food vending permit is necessary
prior to a revocation hearing to protect public health, safety or general
welfare, the City Manager may suspend a mobile food vending permit, effective
immediately, prior to any revocation hearing. Should a mobile food vending
permit be suspended or revoked, the vendor shall be required to cease
operations immediately or be subject to action which may include impounding of
the vehicle and/or a citation. A public hearing with the City Council for the
revocation of the mobile food vending permit shall be conducted in accordance
with §
110.26 (Revocation of License).
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.44 ABATEMENT GENERALLY.
   (A)   Failure to permanently remove a food vending vehicle or group site and
failure to cease operation as a food vending vehicle or group site after the
termination, revocation, expiration, or suspension of any permit issued
pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance, and shall be
subject to enforcement and abatement procedures set forth in
Chapter 98 of this code.
   (B)   When the City Manager, or his or her designee, determines that an
individual food vending vehicle or a group site has been used as an instrument
for, or has contributed substantially to a violation of this chapter, the City
Manager, or his or her designee, may deem the violation a public nuisance and
issue a notice to abate the mobile food vending vehicle or group site
operation, and direct the responsible party to:
      (1)   Comply with the notice to abate;
      (2)   Comply with a time schedule for compliance; and
      (3)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the
violation from recurring.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.45 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   (A)   Upon declaring and deeming a violation of this chapter a nuisance, the
City Manager or his other designee shall send a notice of abatement to the
property owner, individual food vendor, or responsible party. The notice of
abatement shall contain the following:
      (1)   The street address and legal description of the site sufficient for
identification of the premises or property upon which the nuisance condition(s)
is located;
      (2)   A statement that the enforcement official has determined pursuant
to this chapter that the applicant, as well as the property owner if the
activity is located on private property, are in violation of this chapter;
      (3)   A statement specifying the condition that has been deemed a public
nuisance; and
      (4)   A statement ordering the property owner, individual food vendor,
and/or responsible party to abate the condition(s), and specifying the manner
in which the same shall be abated, and the period within which such abatement
shall be accomplished.
   (B)   Service of said notice may be made by delivery to the property owner,
individual food vendor, or responsible party and to the applicant or person in
possession personally or by enclosing the same in a sealed envelope, addressed
to the occupant at such premises, or to the property owner at the address
provided in the mobile food vending permit application, postage prepaid,
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, and depositing same in
the United States mail. Service shall be deemed complete at the time of the
deposit in the United States mail.
   (C)   It is unlawful for the property owner, individual food vendor, or
responsible party to fail or neglect to comply with such order or notice of
abatement. In the event that the property owner, individual food vendor, and/or
responsible party shall not promptly proceed to abate said nuisance condition
(s) within seven days of notice to abate, as ordered by the enforcing official,
the abatement procedure set forth in Chapter 98 may be undertaken.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.46 VIOLATIONS CONSTITUTING INFRACTIONS.
   Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of an infraction.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.47 REMEDIES ARE CUMULATIVE.
   All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative and use of
any remedy provided in this chapter shall not bar the city form the pursuit of
any other remedy available by law.
(Ord. 2021-004, passed 8-24-21)
§ 128.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalties for violation of food vending permit requirements. Any
violation of this chapter may be charged as a civil penalty or administrative
citation as provided for in Chapter 98 of this code. Enforcement action
specifically authorized by this section may be utilized in conjunction with, or
in addition to, any other statutory, code, administrative or regulatory
procedure applicable to this chapter, including confiscation of merchandise and
food for sale, or impoundment of the food vending vehicle. In addition, nothing
in this section shall be interpreted to preclude or limit the city from seeking
injunctive or other judicial relief.
   (B)   Penalty for violation. Any person violating any provision of this
chapter shall be punished upon a first violation by a fine of not more than
$100 and, for a second violation within a period of one year, by a fine of not
more than $200 and, for a third or any subsequent violation within a one-year
period, by a fine of not more than $500. Any violation beyond the third, within
a one-year period may be charged by the City Attorney as a misdemeanor and the
penalty for conviction of the same shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than
six months or by both. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to civil penalties and
administrative citations per Chapter 98 of this code and subject to
confiscation of their merchandise and food for sale, and/or impoundment of the
food vending vehicle.
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
         
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
         
132.   WEAPONS OFFENSES
         
133.   SKATEBOARDING PROHIBITED
         
134.   PROHIBITION AGAINST UNDERAGE DRINKING, CANNABIS USE, AND SOCIAL HOST
LIABILITY
         
135.   JUNK DEALERS AND SCRAP METAL RECYCLERS
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Disorderly conduct; unlawful assembly
   
130.02   Loitering
   
130.03   Curfew
   
130.04   Interference with police dogs
   
130.05   Public urination
   
130.06   Public defecation
   
130.07   Spitting on public property
   
130.08   Loitering for drug activity
Street Gangs
   
130.15   Legislative findings and declaration
   
130.16   Participation in criminal street gang prohibited
   
130.17   Buildings or places used by criminal street gangs a nuisance
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT; UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      TUMULTUOUS CONDUCT. Conduct that results in or is likely to result in
serious bodily injury to a person or substantial damage to property.
      UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY. An assembly of five or more persons whose common
object is to commit an unlawful act, or a lawful act by unlawful means. Prior
concert is not necessary to form an unlawful assembly.
   (B)   Prohibitions. No person shall recklessly, knowingly, or intentionally:
      (1)   Engage in fighting or in tumultuous conduct;
      (2)   Make unreasonable noise and continue to do so after being asked to
stop;
      (3)   Disrupt a lawful assembly of persons;
      (4)   Obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
      (5)   Participate in unlawful assembly.
(`67 Code, § 7-3-2)
§ 130.02 LOITERING.
   (A)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in a
place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon
appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or
manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless flight
by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a police officer
shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person
an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by
requesting the person to identify himself or herself and to explain his or her
presence or conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this
section if the police officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if
it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if
it had been believed by the police officer at the time, would have dispelled
the alarm. Any police officer may arrest any person suspected of being a
loiterer or prowler without a warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay
in arresting the suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the
suspect's escape.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a
police officer, or where a “no loitering” sign or signs have been posted, to
loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk,
street, curb, cross-walk, walkway area, mall or that portion of private
property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the
free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon. It shall be unlawful for any
person to block, obstruct, or prevent free access to the entrance to any
building open to the public.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACE has the following
definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning: an area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles
(whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general public, including
those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and
entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.03 CURFEW.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter
on a public street or in or about any other public place in the city between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the day immediately following, unless
the minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or an adult person having
legal control or charge of the minor.
(`67 Code, § 7-7-1)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or any adult person
having legal control or charge of any minor under the age of 18 years to
permit, allow or let such minor loiter on a public street or in or about any
other public place in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of
the day immediately following, unless such minor is accompanied by a parent,
guardian or other adult person having legal control or charge of such minor.
(`67 Code, § 7-7-2)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage
any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter on a public street or in or about
any other place in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of
the day immediately following unless such minor is accompanied by a parent,
guardian or other adult person having legal control or charge of such minor.
(`67 Code, § 7-7-3) (Ord. 109, passed 12-8-52)
   (D)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:
      (1)   Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or custodian;
      (2)   Accompanied by an adult specified by a parent, guardian, or
custodian;
      (3)   Carrying out an errand or other lawful activity as directed by a
parent, guardian, or custodian;
      (4)   Occupying the sidewalk of the place where the minor resides, or the
sidewalk of a place where the minor has permission from his or her parent or
guardian to be, or the sidewalk of a next-door neighbor not communicating an
objection to a police officer; or
      (5)   Participating in, going to, or returning from: lawful employment; a
lawful athletic, educational, entertainment, religious, or social event; or
interstate travel.
§ 130.04 INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE DOGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully tease, taunt, torment,
strike, kick, mutilate, disable, or otherwise injure, or kill, or to interfere
with any dog while such animal is being used by the Riverbank Police Services
Division, or any officer or employee thereof, in the performance of any
function or duty of the Department, or of such officer or employee.
(`67 Code, § 7-2-6) (Ord. 85-10, passed 9-9-85)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.05 PUBLIC URINATION
   It is unlawful for any person to discharge, release, or otherwise cause to
be placed human urine in any place open to the public, upon any street,
alleyway, walkway, gully, telephone booth, park or other public way, in or upon
any parking lot to which the public has access, in or upon any premises, public
property or a vacant lot to which the public has access, in or upon any
premises, public property or a vacant lot, or in any water or waterway, upon
levees or tanks adjacent thereto except in toilets, portable toilets, or other
receptacles designed for the purpose of urination.
(`67 Code, § 7-3-4) (Ord. 99-02, passed 3-8-99)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.06 PUBLIC DEFECATION
   It is unlawful to discharge, release, or otherwise cause to be placed human
feces or other material from human bowels in any place open to the public, upon
any street, alleyway, walkway, gully, telephone booth, park, or other public
way, in or upon any parking lot to which the public has access, in or upon any
premises, public property or vacant lot, or in any water or waterway, upon
levees or tanks adjacent thereto, except in toilets, portable toilets, or other
receptacles designed for the purpose of defecation and designated for that
purpose.
(`67 Code, § 7-3-5) (Ord. 99-02, passed 3-8-99)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.07 SPITTING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate any secretion, saliva,
or other substance in any place open to the public, upon any street, alleyway,
walkway, gully, telephone booth, park or other public way, or in any parking
lot to which the public has access, in or upon any premises, public property or
vacant lot, or in any water or waterway, upon levees or tanks adjacent thereto.
(`67 Code, § 7-3-6) (Ord. 99-02, passed 3-8-99)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.08 LOITERING FOR DRUG ACTIVITY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
      KNOWN UNLAWFUL DRUG USER, POSSESSOR OR SELLER. A person who has, within
the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within the
state of any unlawful drug activity, or convicted of any substantially similar
activity under the laws of any other state, or a person who displays physical
characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, including but not limited
thereto such things as needle tracks, or persons arrested within two years
while in the possession of illegal controlled substances or drug paraphernalia.
      UNLAWFUL DRUG ACTIVITY. Any act or conduct declared to be unlawful under
the provisions of Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 11350 through 11400 and such
amendments thereto as may hereafter be adopted.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to loiter in, on, or near any
thoroughfare or place open to the public or place open to public view in a
manner and under circumstances manifesting a purpose of engaging in unlawful
drug activity.
   (C)   Among the circumstances that may be considered in determining whether
a person has violated this section based upon the knowledge and personal
observations of the arresting officer are the following:
      (1)   The person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller.
      (2)   The person is in the company of or inside or near a vehicle
registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, seller, or a person for
whom there is an outstanding warrant for unlawful drug activity.
      (3)   The person is currently subject to an order prohibiting his or her
presence in a drug area or prohibiting the person from being in the company of
a known drug user, possessor, or seller.
      (4)   The person behaves in a manner as to raise reasonable suspicion
that he or she is seeking to engage in or is about to engage in any unlawful
drug activity, including by way of example only acting as a lookout, making
gestures or statements to motorists or pedestrians known to represent
invitations to purchase or sell drugs, or exchanging small objects or packages
with another person in a furtive manner.
      (5)   The person is identified as a member of a criminal street gang as
defined in Cal. Penal Code § 186.22(f) or a group which has, among its members,
known unlawful drug users, possessors, or sellers. The method of identification
may include but is not limited to the wearing of distinctive clothing or
insignias.
      (6)   The person attempts to conceal himself or herself from the
observation of the arresting officer or conceals or disposes of any object
which reasonably could be involved in the conduct of any unlawful drug
activity.
(`67 Code, § 7-3-7) (Ord. 99-02, passed 3-8-99)
Penalty, see § 130.99
STREET GANGS
§ 130.15 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND DECLARATION.
   (A)   Recognition of rights. The City Council hereby finds and declares that
it is the right of every person to be secure and protected from fear,
intimidation and physical harm caused by the activities of violent groups and
individuals. It is not the intent of this chapter to interfere with the
exercise of the constitutionally protected rights of freedom of expression and
association. The City Council hereby recognizes the constitutional right of
every citizen to harbor and express beliefs on any lawful subject whatsoever,
to lawfully associate with others who share similar beliefs, to petition
lawfully constituted authority for a redress of perceived grievances and to
participate in the electoral process.
   (B)   Intent of chapter; deterring activity. The City Council, however,
further finds that a state of crises can readily be created by violent street
gangs whose members threaten, terrorize and commit a multitude of crimes
against the peaceful citizens of their neighborhoods. These activities, both
individually and collectively, can present a clear and present danger to public
order and safety and are not constitutionally protected. It is the intent of
the City Council in enacting this chapter to deter and prevent criminal
activity by street gangs by focusing upon patterns of criminal activity and
upon the organized nature of street gangs, which together, are the chief source
of terror created by street gangs. The City Council further finds that an
effective means of punishing and deterring the criminal activities of street
gangs is through forfeiture of the profits, proceeds and instrumentalities
acquired, accumulated or used by street gangs.
(`67 Code, § 7-17-1) (Ord. 92-15, passed 10-12-92)
§ 130.16 PARTICIPATION IN CRIMINAL STREET GANG PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Any person who actively participates in any criminal street gang with
knowledge that its members engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal
activity, and who wilfully promotes, furthers or assists in any felonious
criminal conduct by members of that gang, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail
not exceeding six months, or both.
   (B)   As used in this subchapter, PATTERN OF CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY means
the commission of, attempted commission of, or solicitation of, sustained
juvenile petition for, or conviction of two or more of the following offenses,
provided that at least one of these offenses occurred after the effective date
hereof and the last of those offenses occurred within three years after a prior
offense, and the offenses are committed on separate occasions, or by two or
more persons:
      (1)   Assault with a deadly weapon or by means of force likely to produce
great bodily injury, as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 245.
      (2)   Robbery, as defined in Cal. Penal Code §§ 211 et seq.
      (3)   Unlawful homicide or manslaughter, as defined in Cal. Penal Code §§
187 et seq.
      (4)   The sale, possession for sale, transportation, manufacture, offer
for sale, or offer to manufacture controlled substances as defined in Cal.
Health and Safety Code §§ 11054 through 11058.
      (5)   Shooting at an inhabited dwelling or occupied motor vehicle, as
defined in Cal. Penal Code § 246.
      (6)   Discharging or permitting the discharge of a firearm from a motor
vehicle, as defined in Cal. Penal Code §§ 12034(a) and (b).
      (7)   Arson, as defined in Cal. Penal Code §§ 450 et seq.
      (8)   The intimidation of witnesses and victims, as defined in Cal. Penal
Code § 136.1.
      (9)   Grand theft, as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 487, when the value of
the money, labor, or real or personal property taken exceeds $ 10,000.
      (10)   Grand theft of any vehicle, trailer, or vessel, as described in
Cal. Penal Code § 487h (repealed).
      (11)   Burglary, as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 459.
      (12)   Rape, as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 261.
      (13)   Looting, as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 463.
      (14)   Money laundering, as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 186.10.
      (15)   Kidnapping, as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 207.
      (16)   Mayhem, as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 203.
      (17)   Aggravated mayhem, as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 205.
      (18)   Torture, as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 206.
      (19)   Felony extortion, as defined in Cal. Penal Code §§ 518 and 520.
      (20)   Felony vandalism, as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 594(b)(1).
      (21)   Carjacking, as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 215.
      (22)   The sale, delivery, or transfer of a firearm, as defined in Cal.
Penal Code § 12072.
      (23)   Possession of a pistol, revolver, or other firearm capable of
being concealed upon the person in violation of Cal. Penal Code § 12101(a)(1).
(Cal. Penal Code §§ 186.22(e)(1) through (23)) (`67 Code, § 7-17-2) (Ord. 92-
15, passed 10-12-92)
   (C)   As used in this subchapter, CRIMINAL STREET GANG means any ongoing
organization, association or group of three or more persons, whether formal or
informal, having as one of its primary activities the commission of one or more
of the criminal acts enumerated in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(9), inclusive,
above, having a common name or common identifying sign or symbol, whose numbers
individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal
activity.
(Cal. Penal Code § 186.22(f)) (`67 Code, § 7-17-2) (Ord. 92-15, passed 10-12-
92)
§ 130.17 BUILDINGS OR PLACES USED BY CRIMINAL STREET GANGS A NUISANCE.
   Every building or place used by members of a criminal street gang for the
purpose of the commission of the offenses listed in §
130.16(B) or any offense involving dangerous or deadly weapons, burglary, or
rape, and every building or place, wherein or upon which that criminal conduct
by gang members takes place, is a nuisance which shall be enjoined, abated, and
prevented and for which damages may be recovered, whether it is a public or
private nuisance, pursuant to Cal. Penal Code, § 186.22a.
(Cal. Penal Code, § 186.22a(a)) (`67 Code, § 7-17-3) (Ord. 92-15, passed 10-12-
92)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty has been established shall be punished as provided in
§ 10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§
130.05 through
130.08 is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for
the first time under this section shall be subject to a fine of $250, or to
imprisonment in the county jail for a period of 60 days, or to both fine and
imprisonment. Any person convicted of any provision of §§
130.05 through
130.08 for the second or greater time within one year shall be subject to a
fine of up to $1,000, or to imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to
exceed 180 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment.
(`67 Code, § 7-3-12) (Ord. 99-02, passed 3-8-99)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Water on streets
Graffiti
   
131.10   Purpose and intent
   
131.11   Graffiti defined
   
131.12   Reward authority
   
131.13   Removal provisions
   
131.14   Direction to county probation officer to recoup city costs
   
131.15   Accessibility to graffiti implements
   
131.16   Sale to minors prohibited
   
131.17   Possession by minors prohibited
   
131.18   Violation - penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 WATER ON STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to
drain water or permit water to be drained from his lands or any lands
controlled by him onto any street or alley within the city.
   (B)   It shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to
store water or distribute water for any purpose so as to permit it to overflow
onto, to saturate by seepage or to obstruct any street or alley in the city.
(`67 Code, § 7-2-3) (Ord. 73, passed 8-18-47)
Penalty, see § 10.99
GRAFFITI
§ 131.10 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of the City Council, through the adoption of
this subchapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and
private property from acts of vandalism and defacement, especially but not
limited to graffiti on privately and publicly owned walls, which are inimical
and destructive of the rights and value of private property owners as well as
the total community. It is further the intent of the City Council, through the
adoption of this notice upon all of those who callously disregard the property
rights of others, that the law enforcement agency of the city, the Riverbank
Police Services Division, will strictly enforce the law and severely prosecute
those persons engaging in the defacement of public and private properties.
(Ord. 95-02, passed 2-27-95)
§ 131.11 GRAFFITI DEFINED.
   As used in this subchapter, GRAFFITI includes any inscription, word, figure,
or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted, pasted, or
otherwise affixed to or on any surface, regardless of the nature of the
material of that structural component, to the extent that same was not
authorized in advance by the owner thereof, or, despite advance authorization,
is otherwise deemed by the Council to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 95-02, passed 2-27-95)
§ 131.12 REWARD AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 53069.5, the city does hereby offer a
reward up to $500 for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any
person for violation of Cal. Penal Code § 594 by the use of graffiti, or other
acts of vandalism, not to exceed $500 per incident of graffiti. In the event of
multiple contributors of information, the reward amount shall be divided by the
city in the manner it shall deem appropriate. For the purposes of this section,
diversion of the offending violator to a community service program or a plea
bargain to a lesser offense shall constitute a conviction.
   (B)   Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the city.
Each claim shall:
      (1)   Specifically identify the date, location and kind of property
damaged or destroyed.
      (2)   Identify by name the person who has convicted, or confessed to the
damage or destruction of the city property.
      (3)   Identify the court and the date upon which the conviction occurred
or the place and the date of the confession.
   (C)   The person committing the graffiti or vandalism, and if an
unemancipated minor, then the custodial parent of said minor, shall be liable
for any reward paid pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 95-02, passed 2-27-95; Am. Ord. 2000-08, passed 9-11-00)
§ 131.13 REMOVAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. Graffiti is a nuisance. The existence of
graffiti within the city limits is a public and private nuisance, and may be
abated according to the provisions and procedures herein contained.
   (B)   Right of city to require removal (self-removal). It is unlawful for
any person who is the owner or who has primary responsibility for control of
property or who has primary responsibility for the repair or maintenance of
property (“Responsible Party”) to permit property which is defaced with
graffiti to remain so defaced for a period of seven days after notice of same,
unless:
      (1)   Said person shall demonstrate by a preponderance of evidence that
they do not have the financial or physical ability to remove the defacing
graffiti; or
      (2)   Unless it can be demonstrated that the responsible party has an
active program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the
graffiti as part of that program, in which case it shall be unlawful to permit
such property defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of 15 days
after notice of same.
   (C)   Right of city to remove.
      (1)   Whenever the city becomes aware, or is notified and determines that
graffiti is so located on public or privately owned property viewable from a
public or quasi public place within the city, the city shall be authorized to
use public funds for the removal of same, or for the painting or repairing of
same, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or
repair of any more extensive area than that where the graffiti is located,
unless the City Manager, or his designee, determines in writing that a more
extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an
aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the
responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repaint or repairing the more
extensive area.
      (2)   Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a
public entity other than the city, for the purpose of removal of graffiti, the
city shall attempt to secure the consent of the property owner, and a release
of the city from liability for damage to private or public property.
      (3)   If a responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti
within the time herein specified, or if the city shall have requested consent
to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the responsible party shall
have refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the city consistent with
the terms of this section, the city shall commence abatement and cost recovery
proceedings for the removal of the graffiti according to the following
procedure.
         (a)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, (“hearing officer”)
shall give not less than 48 hours notice, served in the same manner as summons
in a civil action in accordance with Cal. Code Civ. Proc. §§ 415.10 et seq. If
the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be
served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a
period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the county in which the property is located pursuant
to Cal. Gov't Code § 6062). The notice shall be given to the responsible party
or parties who are responsible for the maintenance of a parcel of property
containing graffiti (“property”), and, if a different person is the owner of
record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained, based on the
last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more
current, then to said owner (“owner”) also, of a due process hearing at which
said responsible party and owner shall be entitled to present evidence and
argue that his or her property does not contain graffiti. The determination of
the hearing officer after the due process hearing shall be final and not
appealable. If, after the due process hearing, regardless of the attendance of
the responsible party, owner, or their respective agents, the hearing officer
determines that the property contains graffiti viewable from a public or quasi-
public place, the hearing officer shall give written notice (“eradication
order”) that, unless the graffiti is removed within five days thereafter, the
city shall enter upon the property, cause the removal, painting over (in such
color as shall meet with the approval of the hearing officer) or such other
eradication thereof (“eradication effort”) as the hearing officer determines
appropriate, and shall provide the responsibility party and owner thereafter
with an accounting of the costs of such eradication effort on a “full cost
recovery basis.”
         (b)   Not sooner than the time specified in the order of the hearing
officer, the City Manager, or his designee, shall implement the eradication
order, and shall provide an accounting to the responsible party, and as
appropriate, the owner, of the costs thereof (“eradication accounting”).
         (c)   If the responsible party or owner fails to request a hearing
before the hearing officer on the eradication accounting (“cost of hearing”),
or if requested, and a cost hearing is conducted after extending due process to
the responsible party and, as appropriate, the owner, after such a cost
hearing, the hearing officer determines that all or a portion of the costs are
appropriately chargeable to the eradication effort, the total amount set forth
in the eradication accounting, or such amount thereof determined as appropriate
by the hearing officer, (assessed eradication charges) shall be due and payable
by the responsible party within 30 days. Any amount of assessed eradication
charges assessed by the hearing officer which are less than the total amount
set forth in the eradication accounting shall be explained by written letter
from the hearing officer to the City Councilmembers.
         (d)   As to such property where the responsible party is the owner, if
all or any portion of the assessed eradication charges remain unpaid after 30
days, pursuant to the authority created by law, including Cal. Gov't Code §§
38773 et seq., such portion thereof as shall remain unpaid shall constitute and
is hereby declared to constitute a lien on the property which was the subject
matter of the eradication effort. The Director of Public Works shall present a
Resolution of Lien to the City Council, and upon passage and adoption thereof,
shall cause a certified copy thereof to be recorded with the County Recorder's
Office.
   (D)   Financial responsibility of minor perpetrator/parents or guardians for
cost of removal. The recovery of expense of abatement of any nuisance resulting
from the defacement of property by graffiti or any other inscribed material by
a minor who has created, caused or committed the nuisance shall be according to
the following procedure:
      (1)   The City Manager, or his or her designee (“hearing officer”), shall
give the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the
minor not less than 48 hours notice of a hearing to be held by the hearing
officer for the purpose of showing cause why the city should not recover the
expense of abatement from the minor and the parent or guardian having custody
and control of the minor. Following notice, the hearing shall be held by the
hearing officer at the time, date, and place designated and at such hearing the
minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor may
each be heard and provided with the opportunity to show cause why the city
should not recover the expense of abatement from the minor and the parent or
guardian having custody and control of the minor. Following the hearing, the
hearing officer shall determine whether the city should recover expense of
abatement from the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control
of the minor.
      (2)   If the hearing officer determines that the city should recover the
expense of abatement from the minor and the parent or guardian having custody
and control of the minor, the city may provide an accounting of the expense of
abatement along with a demand for payment to the minor and the parent or
guardian having custody and control of the minor.
      (3)   The parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor
shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for the expense of
abatement pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §§ 38772, 38773.2, and 38773.6. If
payment is not make within 30 days from the date of the accounting and demand
for payment, the payment shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to a
penalty assessment of $100 plus interest on the unpaid amount plus penalty,
which interest shall accrue at the rate of 1-1/2% per month until paid.
      (4)   In the event the expense of abatement has not been paid within 30
days from the date of issuing an accounting and demand for payment, the amount
unpaid including any penalty and interest therein shall constitute a lien
pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §§ 38772 and 38773.2 against the property of the
minor and against the property of the parent or guardian having custody and
control of the minor. Prior to recording a notice of lien, the hearing officer
shall provide notice pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.2. Any such lien not
paid by June 30 of each year shall, upon adoption of a resolution by the City
Council, may be collected along with, and in the same manner as, the general
property taxes. The liened property shall be subject to the penalties,
procedures, and sale in case of delinquency as provided in the Civil Code of
California.
      (5)   As an alternative to a lien and pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §
38773.6, the expense of abatement shall constitute a special assessment against
a parcel of land owned by the minor or by the parent or guardian having custody
and control of the minor. The assessment shall be collected as provided for in
Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.6.
      (6)   In addition to any other remedy provided herein or available at
law, the expense of abatement pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 38772 shall
constitute a personal obligation against the minor and a personal obligation
against the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor.
(Ord. 95-02, passed 2-27-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.14 DIRECTION TO COUNTY PROBATION OFFICER TO RECOUP CITY COSTS.
   Pursuant to Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code §742.14, the city hereby reserves the
right to direct the County Probation Officer to recoup the city's cost
associated with defacement by minors of its property and the properties of
others by graffiti or other inscribed material.
   (A)   Cost of enforcement. All documented costs related to enforcement will
be charged to the defendant upon conviction.
   (B)   Cost of removal. All documented costs related to removal will be
charged to the defendant upon conviction.
(Ord. 95-02, passed 2-27-95; Am. Ord. 2008-003, passed 3-10-08)
§ 131.15 ACCESSIBILITY TO GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS.
   Every person, firm, or entity who owns, conducts, operates, or manages a
retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements within the city
shall store, stock, keep or display for sale or transfer graffiti implements in
an area secure and not accessible to the public in the regular course of
business and accessible only to employees of such retail commercial
establishments.
(Ord. 2008-003, passed 3-10-08)
§ 131.16 SALE TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, except a parent or
legal guardian, to sell, give or in any way furnish, any aerosol spray paint
container, dye container, or any marker pen with a tip exceeding three-eights
of an inch in width, containing anything other than a solution which can be
removed with water after it dries, to any minor under the age of 18 years,
unless that person, firm, or corporation provides for the supervision of the
minor's use of such aerosol paint container, dye container, or marker pen, so
as to assure that the minor does not deface any public or private property, or
violate any other section of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-003, passed 3-10-08)
§ 131.17 POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED.
   No person under 18 years of age may have in their possession any aerosol
paint container, dye container, or marker pen with a tip larger than three-
eighths of an inch in width on any public highway, street, alley, or way, or in
an automobile, vehicle, or any other conveyance unless that person is
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
(Ord. 2008-003, passed 3-10-08)
§ 131.18 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2008-003, passed 3-10-08)
CHAPTER 132: WEAPONS OFFENSES
Section
Unlawful Discharge
   
132.01   Definitions
   
132.02   Prohibition
   
132.03   Exemptions
UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE
§ 132.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The term  GUN within the meaning of this chapter shall be construed to mean
and include air guns, air rifles, pistols, revolvers and guns of any character
fired by explosives. The singular number where used in this chapter shall
include the plural, and the plural the singular.
(`67 Code, § 7-5-1) (Ord. 86, passed 3-21-49)
§ 132.02 PROHIBITION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire any gun within the city
and within any city-owned park situated outside the city limits.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to police officers in the discharge of
their official duties.
   (C)   The term GUN within the meaning of this section shall be construed to
mean air guns, BB guns, spring guns, air rifles, pistols, revolvers, guns of
any character fired by explosives, air compulsion, or mechanical devices.
   (D)   Violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor.
(`67 Code, § 7-5-2) (Ord. 84-11, passed 9-24-84; Am. Ord. 99-12, passed 12-13-
99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to any regularly established gun or rifle club
or shooting gallery, the location of which has previously been approved in
writing by the Sheriff's Commanding Officer of the city, nor to any person
specially licensed by the Council to destroy pests, nor to officers in the
discharge of their official duties.
(`67 Code, § 7-5-4) (Ord. 86, passed 3-21-49)
CHAPTER 133: SKATEBOARDING PROHIBITED
Section
   
133.01   Purpose and intent
   
133.02   Definitions
   
133.03   Skateboarding prohibited
   
133.04   Posting of no skateboarding signs
   
133.99   Penalty
§ 133.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The City Council finds and declares that the purpose of this chapter is to
promote the public peace, morals, health, safety, and general welfare of
persons in the city by regulating the activity of skateboarding on certain
public property and on certain private property which is accessible to the
general public.
(Ord. 2002-005, passed 6-10-02)
§ 133.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter concerning skateboarding,
the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein
set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is
intended.
   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT . Shall have the same meaning as that set forth in
this code.
   NUISANCE . Any activity which:
      (1)   Threatens injury or damage to persons or property; or
      (2)   Creates an obstruction or presents a hazard to the free use of
public or private property by pedestrians or motorists.
   SKATEBOARD . All wheeled objects, coasters, toys, conveyances, or similar
devices used for transportation or sport which are propelled by human power and
which are not classified as bicycles or roller skates.
(Ord. 2002-005, passed 6-10-02)
§ 133.03 SKATEBOARDING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The City Council may, by resolution, prohibit skateboarding on public
streets, sidewalks, parking lots, and other public property when it is
determined to be necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
pedestrians, motorists, or persons operating said skateboards on said streets
and sidewalks.
   (B)   No person shall skateboard on public streets, sidewalks, parking lots,
and other public property located in the Central Business District.
   (C)   No person shall skateboard on any privately owned property which is
posted with "No Skateboarding" signs as required by this chapter, without the
express consent of the property owner or property manager.
   (D)   No person shall use a skateboard in a manner that creates a nuisance.
(Ord. 2002-005, passed 6-10-02) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.04 POSTING OF NO SKATEBOARDING SIGNS.
   (A)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to post
or erect, or cause to be posted or erected, signs prohibiting skateboarding or
the use of skateboards on public streets and sidewalks so designated by
resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   A property owner shall post or erect, or cause to be posted or
erected, at the property owner's sole cost and expense, signs that are readily
visible to the general public in a form reasonably as follows:
   A no skateboarding policy exists for this private property. No person shall
skateboard on this property without the express consent of the property owner
or property management. For inquiries, please contact the management office at
                                       .
(Ord. 2002-005, passed 6-10-02)
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be
an infraction, and punishable as such, notwithstanding the fact that at the
discretion of the city or District Attorney, the violation of any section of
this chapter may be filed as a misdemeanor. The complaint charging such
violation shall specify whether the violation is a misdemeanor or an
infraction. Each day a violation of any provision of this chapter shall
continue to be a new and separate violation.
   (B)   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute
a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of
restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any manner
provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.
(Ord. 2002-005, passed 6-10-02)
CHAPTER 134: PROHIBITION AGAINST UNDERAGE DRINKING, CANNABIS USE, AND SOCIAL
HOST LIABILITY
Section
   
134.01   Legislative findings
   
134.02   Intent and purpose
   
134.03   Definitions
   
134.04   Consumption of alcohol and cannabis by minor prohibited in public
place, place open to public, or place not open to public
   
134.05   Hosting, permitting, allowing a party, gathering, or event where
minors consume alcoholic beverages and cannabis prohibited
   
134.06   Prima facie evidence
   
134.07   Enforcement authority
   
134.08   Public nuisance and recovery of response costs
   
134.09   Billing and collection
   
134.10   Special fund
   
134.11   Appeals
   
134.99   Penalty
§ 134.01 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   (A)   Minors often obtain, possess, or consume alcoholic beverages and/or
cannabis at gatherings held at private residences or other private property,
places or premises, including rented commercial premises which are under the
control of a person who knows or should know of the consumption of alcoholic
beverages and/or cannabis by minors, yet persons responsible for the occurrence
of such gatherings often fail to take reasonable steps to prevent the
consumption of alcoholic beverages and/or cannabis by minors at these
gatherings.
   (B)   Consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors who are under the legal
age to consume alcohol in the state is harmful to the minors themselves and
poses an immediate threat to the public health, safety, and welfare in that it
increases alcohol abuse by minors, physical altercations, violent crimes
including rape and other sexual offenses, accidental injury, neighborhood
vandalism, and excessive noise disturbance, all of which may require
intervention by local law enforcement.
   (C)   Consumption of cannabis by minors who are under the legal age to
consume cannabis in the state is harmful to the minors themselves and poses an
immediate threat to the public health, safety, and welfare in that it increases
cannabis use by minors, it detrimentally affects the mental and physical health
of minors, and it increases rates of driving under the influence, all of which
may require intervention by local law enforcement.
   (D)   The prohibitions found in this chapter are reasonable and expected to
deter the consumption of alcoholic beverages and/or cannabis by minors by
holding responsible persons who know of, or should know of, the illegal conduct
yet fail to stop or prevent it. In addition, the revenue received by the city
after cost reimbursement, will be directed toward alcohol and cannabis abuse
and prevention education programs in the community.
(Ord. 2007-006, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 2019-008, passed 12-10-19)
§ 134.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are:
   (A)   To protect public health, safety, and general welfare;
   (B)   To enforce laws prohibiting the service to and consumption of
alcoholic beverages and/or cannabis to minors; and
   (C)   To reduce the costs of providing law enforcement, fire, and other
emergency response services to premises where alcoholic beverages and/or
cannabis are served to or consumed by a minor, by holding the responsible
person, social host, and/or landowners responsible for the costs associated
with providing law enforcement and other emergency response services.
(Ord. 2007-006, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 2019-008, passed 12-10-19)
§ 134.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT. Any person over the age of 18 years.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Includes any liquid or solid material intended to be
ingested by a person which contains ethanol, also known as ethyl alcohol,
drinking alcohol, or alcohol, including, but not limited to, alcoholic
beverages as defined in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 23004, intoxicating liquor,
malt beverage, beer, wine, spirits, liqueur, whiskey, rum, vodka, cordials,
gin, and brandy, and any mixture containing one or more alcoholic beverages.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE includes a mixture of one or more alcoholic beverages
whether found or ingested separately or as a mixture.
   CANNABIS. Cannabis has the same meaning as that term is defined by Cal. Bus.
& Prof. Code § 26001. Includes any liquid or solid material intended to be
smoked or ingested by a person which contains THC, also known as
Tetrahydrocannabinol. In the enforcement of this chapter, cannabis is adult use
cannabis and not medicinal cannabis used by a qualified patient.
   FAMILY GATHERING. A gathering where each minor present is supervised by his
or her parent or legal guardian.
   GATHERING. A party, gathering, or event where a group of two or more persons
have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity.
   JUVENILE. Any person under the age of 18 years.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the
court.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 21 years.
   PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or
step-parent of another person.
   PREMISES. Any residence or other private property, place, or premises,
including any commercial or business premises.
   QUALIFIED PATIENT. Qualified patient has the same meaning as that term is
defined by Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.7.
   RESPONSE COSTS. The costs associated with response by law enforcement, fire,
or other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but not
limited to:
      (1)   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire,
or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding
to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative
cost associated with or attributed to such response(s);
      (2)   The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding to,
remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering;
      (3)   The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and
the cost of the use of any such equipment in, responding to, remaining at, or
leaving the scene of a gathering; and
      (4)   Any other allowable costs related to enforcement of §§
134.04 and
134.05.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. A person or persons with a right of possession in the
premises including, but not limited to:
      (1)   An owner of the residence or other private property, place or
premises, including any commercial or business premises;
      (2)   A tenant or lessee of the residence or other private property,
place or premises, including any commercial or business premises;
      (3)   The landlord of another person responsible for the gathering;
      (4)   The person(s) in charge of the residence or other private property,
place or premises, including commercial or business premises;
      (5)   The person(s) who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts, or
controls the gathering or any other person(s) accepting responsibility for such
a gathering; and
      (6)   If a responsible person or social host for the party or gathering
is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile and the juvenile
will be jointly and severally liable for the response costs incurred pursuant
to this chapter. To incur liability for response costs imposed by this chapter,
the responsible person or social host for the gathering must be aware of the
gathering, but need not be present at such gathering, which results in the
imposition of response costs pursuant to this chapter.
   SOCIAL HOST. A person who knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering to
take place where one or more minors consume one or more alcoholic beverages
and/or cannabis on property owned or controlled by the person and the person
knows or reasonably should have known that the minor is consuming or has
consumed an alcoholic beverage and/or cannabis.
(Ord. 2007-006, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 2019-008, passed 12-10-19)
§ 134.04 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL AND/OR CANNABIS BY MINOR PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC
PLACE, PLACE OPEN TO PUBLIC, OR PLACE NOT OPEN TO PUBLIC.
   Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to:
   (A)   Consume at any public place or any place open to the public any
alcoholic beverage and/or cannabis; or
   (B)   Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage
and/or cannabis, unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic
beverages that minor is being supervised by his or her own parent or legal
guardian.   
(Ord. 2007-006, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 2019-008, passed 12-10-19) Penalty,
see §
134.99
§ 134.05 HOSTING, PERMITTING, ALLOWING A PARTY, GATHERING, OR EVENT WHERE
MINORS CONSUME ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND/OR CANNABIS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person having control of any
premises to knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place at said
premises where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage and/or
cannabis, whenever the person having control of the premises either knows a
minor is or has consumed an alcoholic beverage and/or cannabis or reasonably
should have known that a minor is or has consumed an alcoholic beverage and/or
cannabis had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption
of alcoholic beverages and/or cannabis by a minor as set forth in division (B)
of this section.
   (B)   It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who
knowingly hosts, permits or allows a gathering at said premises to take all
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages and/or
cannabis by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps include, but are not
limited to:
      (1)   Controlling access to alcoholic beverages and/or cannabis at the
gathering;
      (2)   Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages and/or cannabis at
the gathering;
      (3)   Verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting
drivers' licenses or other government-issued identification cards to ensure
minors do not consume alcoholic beverages and/or cannabis while at the
gathering; and
      (4)   Supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic
beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or
legal guardian, as permitted by Article I, § 4, of the California Constitution
or if the event is a family gathering or if the minor is a qualified cannabis
patient.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to any California Department of Alcoholic
Beverages Control licensee at any premises regulated by the Department of
Alcoholic Beverages Control.
(Ord. 2007-006, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 2019-008, passed 12-10-19) Penalty,
see §
134.99
§ 134.06 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
   Whenever a responsible person and/or social host having control of the
premises is present at the premises at the time that a minor obtains, possess,
or consumes any alcoholic beverage and/or cannabis, it shall be prima facie
evidence that such adult had the knowledge or should have had the knowledge,
that the minor obtained, possessed, or consumed an alcoholic beverage and/or
cannabis at the gathering.
(Ord. 2007-006, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 2019-008, passed 12-10-19)
§ 134.07 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   The Police Department is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions
of this chapter. The City Attorney and the Police Chief and/or their designees
may exercise any enforcement powers provided by law.
(Ord. 2007-006, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 2019-008, passed 12-10-19)
§ 134.08 PUBLIC NUISANCE AND RECOVERY OF RESPONSE COSTS.
   (A)   In addition to any other remedies available by law, a violation of §§
134.04 and/or
134.05 shall constitute a public nuisance, as an immediate threat to public
health, safety, and welfare.
   (B)   As a public nuisance, the gathering of underage drinkers and/or
cannabis consumers may be summarily abated by police by all reasonable means,
singularly or in combination, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   An order requiring the gathering to be disbanded;
      (2)   Issuance of an administrative citation under this chapter; and/or
      (3)   Issuance of an administrative citation, misdemeanor citation and/or
arrest of any law violators under any other applicable ordinances and/or
statutes.
   (C)   When law enforcement, fire, or other emergency response provider
responds to a gathering at which a minor obtains, possesses, or uses alcoholic
beverages and/or cannabis within the city, all responsible persons and/or
social host(s) shall be jointly and severally liable for the city's response
costs to abate the nuisance.
(Ord. 2007-006, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 2019-008, passed 12-10-19)
§ 134.09 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   The amount of response costs shall be deemed a debt owed to the city
by the responsible person and/or social host. If a juvenile, by the juvenile's
parents or guardians. Any person owing such costs shall be liable in a civil
action brought in the name of the city for recovery for such costs, including
reasonable attorney fees. Notice of the costs for which the responsible person
is liable shall be mailed via first-class mail. The notice shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the person(s) being held liable for the payment of such
costs;
      (2)   The address of the private property or private premises where the
party occurred;
      (3)   The date and time of the response;
      (4)   The law enforcement, fire, or emergency service provider(s) who
responded; and
      (5)   An itemized list of the response costs for which the person(s) is
being held liable. The responsible person must remit payment of the noticed
response costs to the Police Department within 30 calendar days of the date of
the notice. The payment of any such costs shall be stayed upon the filing of a
timely appeal pursuant to §
134.11.
   (B)   The failure of any person to pay the penalties assessed by an
administrative citation and/or response costs within the time specified on the
administrative citation or response cost bill may result in the Police Chief or
his or her authorized designee referring the matter to the Finance Department
or other designated agent for collection. The Police Chief or his or her
designated agent may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the penalties
and/or response costs including the recording of a code enforcement lien
pursuant to the procedures set forth in
Chapter 98 of the city code.
(Ord. 2007-006, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 2019-008, passed 12-10-19)
§ 134.10 SPECIAL FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a special fund for the purposes of
receiving and expending civil penalties and response costs collected. This
special fund shall be known and designated as the Prevention of Underage
Drinking and Cannabis Use Fund.
   (B)   Expenditure of monies. The appropriation of all monies in the
Prevention of Underage Drinking and Cannabis Use Fund shall be made exclusively
for the purpose of prevention of underage drinking and cannabis use programs
within the city. The underage drinking and cannabis use programs shall include
the enforcement of, education for, and prevention of underage drinking and/or
cannabis use. Expenditures shall include, but not be limited to, purchase of
equipment, contractual services, materials and supplies, or any other
expenditures related to the prevention of underage drinking and cannabis use
with the city. The administration of the fund shall conform to this code and
all accounting principles practiced by the city.
   (C)   Accumulation of monies in the fund. The balance remaining in the
Prevention of Underage Drinking and Cannabis Use Fund at the close of any
fiscal year shall be deemed to have been provided for a specialized purpose and
shall be carried forward and accumulated in said fund for the purposes set
forth herein.
(Ord. 2007-006, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 2019-008, passed 12-10-19)
§ 134.11 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person upon whom is imposed a fine/penalty pursuant to §
134.99 and/or response costs pursuant to §
134.08 shall have the right to appeal the imposition of such fine/penalty or
response costs pursuant to the appeal procedures set forth
Chapter 98 of the city code.
   (B)   Failure to appeal shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative
remedies and result in the citation and/or response cost becoming a final
administrative enforcement order.
(Ord. 2007-006, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 2019-008, passed 12-10-19)
§ 134.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Each incident in violation of §§
134.04 and
134.05 shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   In addition to any other remedies available by law, including criminal
prosecution, the city may seek administrative penalties, response costs, and
any other cost associated with enforcement of §§
134.04 and
134.05, through all remedies or procedures provided by statute, ordinance, or
law. Sections
134.04 and
134.05 shall not limit the authority of peace officers to make arrests for any
criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by §§
134.04 and
134.05. If a violation of §
134.04 and/or §
134.05 is prosecuted administratively, the mandatory minimum penalty shall be
$500 for the first offense, $1,000 for a second offense, and $1,500 for a third
offense in a 12-month period.
(Ord. 2007-006, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 2019-008, passed 12-10-19)
CHAPTER 135: JUNK DEALERS AND SCRAP METAL RECYCLERS
Section
   
135.01   Authority
   
135.02   Definitions
   
135.03   Exemptions
   
135.04   Reporting
   
135.05   Seller’s age limit
   
135.06   Hours
   
135.07   Payment
   
135.08   Immediate notice of certain transactions
   
135.09   License
   
135.99   Penalty
§ 135.01 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted in supplementation of Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§
21600 through 21609. This chapter is not intended to supersede the provisions
of these statutes. Any conflict that may exist between this chapter and state
law shall be resolved in favor of the latter. Nothing contained herein shall
relieve any person or legal entity of obligations contained in the Cal. Bus. &
Prof. Code or other provisions of state or local law.
(Ord. 2007-008, passed 12-10-07)
§ 135.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK. Any and all secondhand and used machinery and all ferrous and
nonferrous scrap metals and alloys, but does not include secondhand and used
furniture or pallets.
   JUNK DEALER. Includes any person engaged in the business of buying, selling,
and dealing in junk, any person purchasing, gathering, collecting, soliciting,
or traveling about from place to place procuring junk, and any person
operating, carrying on, conducting, or maintaining a junk yard or place where
junk is gathered together and stored or kept for shipment, sale, or transfer.
   JUNK YARD. Includes any yard, plot, space, enclosure, building, or any other
place where junk is collected, stored, gathered together and kept.
   RECYCLER. Any processor, recycling center, or non-certified recycler, as
those terms defined in Chapter 2 (commencing with § 14502) of Division 12.1 of
the Cal. Pub. Res. Code, who buys or sells scrap metal that constitutes junk,
as defined herein.
   SCRAP METALS AND ALLOYS. Includes, but is not limited to, materials and
equipment commonly used in construction, agricultural operations and electrical
power generation, railroad equipment, oil well rigs, nonferrous materials,
stainless steel, and nickel which are offered for sale to any junk dealer or
recycler, but does not include scrap iron, household generated waste, or
aluminum beverage containers, as defined in Chapter 2 (commencing with § 14502)
of Division 12.1 of the Cal. Pub. Res. Code.
(Ord. 2007-008, passed 12-10-07)
§ 135.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
   (A)   Secondhand furniture merchants;
   (B)   Pawnbrokers;
   (C)   Secondhand car dealers or merchants in connection with automobile and
motor vehicle sales agencies but not carried on and conducted in conjunction
with a junk yard;
   (D)   Persons engaged in the business of selling new automobile tires or
batteries or other equipment taking in part payment used articles of the same
kind and thereafter selling or disposing of the same; or
   (E)   Secondhand oil well supply and equipment dealers not conducting or
carrying on their business in connection with a junk yard.
(Ord. 2007-008, passed 12-10-07)
§ 135.04 REPORTING.
   (A)   Junk dealers or recyclers shall report to the Chief of Police every
day before 12:00 noon, on a form approved by the Chief of Police, a record of
all sales and purchases of the previous 24 hours. The report shall contain the
information required by this chapter and any additional information required by
the Chief of Police as shown on the forms.
   (B)   The report shall, at a minimum, contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, business name, business address, telephone number,
facsimile number, and electronic mail address;
      (2)   The place and date of each sale or purchase of junk made in the
conduct of his or her business as a junk dealer or recycler;
      (3)   The name, valid driver's license number, and state of issuance or
California-issued identification card number, and vehicle license number
including the state of issue of any motor vehicle used in transporting junk to
the junk dealer's or recycler's place of business;
      (4)   The name and address of each person to whom junk is sold or
disposed of, and the license number of any motor vehicle used in transporting
the junk from the junk dealer's or recycler's place of business;
      (5)   A full and complete description of the item or items of junk
purchased or sold, including the item type, quantity, length, diameter, size,
brand, model, manufacturer, and identification number;
      (6)   A statement indicating either that the seller of the junk is the
owner of it, or the name of the person he or she obtained it from, as shown on
a signed transfer document; and
      (7)   The fingerprint of the right-hand index finger, unless such finger
is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the
right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed of
the person from whom junk is received.
(Ord. 2007-008, passed 12-10-07)
Penalty, see § 135.99
§ 135.05 SELLER'S AGE LIMIT.
   It is unlawful for any junk dealer or recycler to purchase, or otherwise
acquire, any junk from any person known, or reasonably should be known by the
junk dealer or recycler to be under the age of 18 years.
(Ord. 2007-008, passed 12-10-07)
Penalty, see § 135.99
§ 135.06 HOURS.
   It is unlawful for any junk dealer or recycler to conduct his or her
business as a junk dealer within the city between the hours of 7:00 p.m. of one
day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day.
(Ord. 2007-008, passed 12-10-07)
Penalty, see § 135.99
§ 135.07 PAYMENT.
   It is unlawful for any junk dealer or recycler to make payment for the
purchase of junk in excess of $200 to any person except by paper draft or
check.
(Ord. 2007-008, passed 12-10-07)
Penalty, see § 135.99
§ 135.08 IMMEDIATE NOTICE OF CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS.
   Every junk dealer or recycler shall immediately notify the Police Services
by telephone, or other means likely to reach the Police Services without delay,
of the sale or purchase, or attempted sale or purchase, of any junk, which
reasonably appear to be used only by governments, utilities, railroads, or for
specific purposes, such as guardrails, manhole covers, high voltage
transmission lines, historical markers, cemetery plaques, light poles, and
bleachers.
(Ord. 2007-008, passed 12-10-07)
Penalty, see § 135.99
§ 135.09 LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to act as a junk
dealer or recycler without first making an application for and receiving a
business license to act as such junk dealer or recycler.
   (B)   License: application; contents. If the application is made by an
individual, he or she shall affirm under penalty of perjury that the contents
of the application are true, and the contents of the application shall include
the name and age of the applicant, his or her present address or addresses, and
the name under which, and the place where, the applicant has conducted a
similar business within 12 months immediately preceding the date of
application. If the business is to be engaged in by a partnership, association,
or corporation, the application for a license shall be made by the general
manger thereof, or by one having the authority of a general manager. In such
case, the application shall state the true name of the organization, the date
of its organization, its type, the location of its principal place of business,
the names and addresses of its officers or, in the case of a co-partnership,
the names and addresses of all the partners.
   (C)   In accordance with Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 12703 and 12733, the
applicant shall attach to the application documentation that the applicant
holds a current and active California Weighmaster License. A copy of the
applicant's current Weighmaster License shall be displayed in a prominent
location at each location where the applicant conducts business.
   (D)   The applicant shall acknowledge having read Penal Code section 496a,
which shall be prominently set forth within the application in bold face.
   (E)   License: application; employee identification. The applicant, at the
request of the Chief of Police, shall accompany the application with
photographs and fingerprints of all the individuals who are to be actually
engaged in the management of the business or in buying or otherwise acquiring
junk for the business for which the license is requested. In the event any
other person, after the license has been granted, is engaged in the management
of the business or in buying, or otherwise acquiring such junk, the licensee
shall furnish to the Police Services on request the photograph and fingerprints
of such person. No license shall be issued until any such demand has been
complied with, and any license that has been issued shall be suspended or
revoked if the licensee does not, within a reasonable time, comply with the
provisions of this section.
   (F)   License: application; investigation. Upon submission of a complete
application for license under this chapter, the application shall be
immediately referred to the Chief of Police for investigation concerning the
applicant's business and character of the applicant. The Chief of Police shall,
after investigation, file a report upon the application designating whether or
not the applicant is a proper person to be granted the license applied for. No
applicant shall be reported as a proper person to be granted a license under
this chapter unless and until it appears that the applicant's conduct or
proposed conduct of the business does and will comply with all applicable laws
and ordinances, including but not limited to those relating to the public
health and to zoning. The Chief of Police shall be allowed 60 days from the
date of receiving a completed application within which to file the report.
   (G)   License: application investigation fees. The application investigation
fee for a junk dealer or recycler's business license shall be $250.
   (H)   License: term. The business licenses provided for in this section
shall be issued for a period of one year from the date of issuance.
   (I)   License: denial; appeal. In the event of the denial of an application
for license under this section, the applicant may, within ten days after the
date written notice of such adverse report is mailed, file with the City
Council a notice of intention to appear before the City Council to appeal the
denial of the application. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day
period, the denial of the application shall be final and conclusive. The notice
of appeal shall be accompanied by the fee amount stated in division (G) above.
   (J)   License: suspension, revocation, or conditioning of license. The City
Council may, upon its own motion or upon the verified complaint in writing of
any person, investigate the actions of any licensee and may, after ten-days
written notice to the licensee and after a hearing before the City Council,
suspend, revoke, or condition the license of any licensee who commits any one
or more of the acts or omissions constituting grounds for disciplinary action
under this section. The grounds for such action shall be summarized in the
notice. The notice provided for herein shall be given by registered or
certified mail, postage prepaid, or in the manner required for the service of
summons in civil actions. Pending the City Council's final decision regarding
the license, a licensee may continue to engage in the business for the period
of his or her license.
   (K)   License: disciplinary action grounds. It shall be a ground for
disciplinary action if any licensee, his or her agent or employee, or any
person connected or associated with the licensee as partner, director, officer,
stockholder, general manager, or person who is exercising managerial authority
of or on behalf of the license has:
      (1)   Knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a
material fact in an application for a license, or in any report or record
required to be filed;
      (2)   Violated any provision or this chapter or of any statute relating
to his or her licensed activity;
      (3)   Been convicted of a felony or any crime involving theft,
embezzlement, or moral turpitude;
      (4)   Committed any act constituting dishonesty or fraud;
      (5)   Committed any unlawful, false, fraudulent, deceptive or dangerous
act while conducting a licensed business;
      (6)   Published, uttered or disseminated any false, deceptive or
misleading statements or advertisements in connection with the operation of a
licensed business;
      (7)   Violated any rule or regulation adopted by the City Council
relating to the licensee's business;
      (8)   Conducted the licensed business in a manner contrary to the peace,
health, safety, and general welfare or the public;
      (9)   Demonstrated that he or she is unfit to be trusted with the
privileges granted by such license; and/or
      (10)   Failed to comply with the regulations of the city.
   (L)   License: revocation without hearing upon conviction. If any person
holding a license under this chapter is convicted in any court of the violation
of any law relative to his or her operation of a licensed business, the City
Council may revoke the license forthwith without any further action thereon
other than giving written notice of revocation to the licensee.
(Ord. 2007-008, passed 12-10-07) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 2007-008, passed 12-10-07)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
         
151.   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
         
152.   SUBDIVISIONS
         
153.   ZONING
         
154.   ZONING OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
         
155.   GRADING
         
156.   OAK AND LANDMARK TREE CONSERVATION
         
157.   WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Purpose and authority
   
150.02   Mandatory duty of care
   
150.03   Severability
   
150.04   Savings clause
Adoption of Standard Codes
   
150.05   Administrative Code
   
150.06   Building Code
   
150.07   Residential Code
   
150.08   Green Building Standards Code
   
150.09   Plumbing Code
   
150.10   Electrical Code
   
150.11   Fire Code
   
150.12   Mechanical Code
   
150.13   Energy Code
   
150.14   Existing Building Code
   
150.15   Historical Building Code
Solar/Photovoltaic Power Systems
   
150.16   Solar/photovoltaic power systems
Electric Vehicles
   
150.17   Electric vehicle charging systems
Systems Development Fees
   
150.30   Title
   
150.31   Purpose
   
150.32   Definitions
   
150.33   Establishment of fees
   
150.34   Applicability of provisions
   
150.35   Construction of facilities
   
150.36   Relationship with other existing fees
   
150.37   Systems Development Fund established
   
150.38   Transportation, parks, water, sewer and storm system development fee
credits
Street Improvements
   
150.55   Purpose; permits required
   
150.56   Requirements for issuance of permit
   
150.57   Plan and profile required
   
150.58   Land dedication
   
150.59   Appeal procedures
Vacant Buildings
   
150.70   Findings; vacant or boarded buildings
   
150.71   Definitions
   
150.72   Vacant or boarded building monitoring program
   
150.73   Failure to register for monitoring program
   
150.74   Notice of violation
   
150.75   Permitted time periods to commence and correct violations
   
150.76   Securing vacant buildings
   
150.77   Opportunity for hearing
   
150.78   Extension
   
150.79   Inspection of premises
   
150.80   Administrative penalty
   
150.81   Administrative penalty; factors
   
150.82   Payment of administrative penalty
   
150.83   Authority to designate agent to resume utility service
   
150.84   Penalties cumulative
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   The purpose of this chapter is to adopt by reference the 2023 Edition of the
California Building Standards Code, Title 24 - Part 1; Part 2, Volume I & II;
Part 2.5; Part 3; Part 4; Part 5; Part 6; Part 8; Part 9; Part 10; and Part 11
of the California Code of Regulations subject to the definitions,
clarifications, and the amendments set forth in this chapter. The purpose of
this chapter is also to provide minimum requirements and standards for the
protection of public safety, health, property, and welfare of the City of
Riverbank. This chapter is adopted under the authority of Cal. Gov’t Code §
50022.2 and Cal. Health and Safety Code § 18941.5.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
§ 150.02 MANDATORY DUTY OF CARE.
   This chapter is not intended to and shall not be construed or given effect
in a manner that imposes upon the city or any officer or employee thereof a
mandatory duty of care towards persons and property within or without the city,
so as to provide a basis of civil liability for damages, except as otherwise
imposed by law.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
§ 150.03 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of §§
150.05 through
150.16 and
157.01 or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of
the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. This
City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter
irrespective of the invalidity of any particular portion thereof and intends
that the invalid portions should be severed and the balance of the ordinance be
enforced.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
§ 150.04 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   The provisions of §§
150.05 through
150.16 and
157.01 shall not affect or impair an act done or right vested or approved or
any proceeding, suit or prosecution had or commenced in any cause before such
repeal shall take affect; but every such act done, or right vested or accrued,
or proceeding, suit or prosecution shall remain in full force and affect to all
intents and purposes as if such ordinance or part thereof so repealed had
remained in force. No offense committed and no liability, penalty or
forfeiture, either civilly or criminally incurred prior to the time when any
such ordinance or part thereof shall be repealed or altered by this Code shall
be discharged or affected by such repeal or alteration; but prosecutions and
suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures shall be
instituted and proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance or
part thereof had not been repealed or altered.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES
§ 150.05 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE.
   In order to regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, wiring,
plumbing, use, height, area, and maintenance of all buildings and structures
within the City of Riverbank, the 2022 Edition of the California Administrative
Code, published by the International Code Council (ICC), as adopted by the
Building Standards Commission of the State of California and codified in the
California Building Standards Code at Title 24, Part 1, of the California Code
of Regulations, except as specifically repealed or amended by ordinance of the
City of Riverbank, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though
set forth in full herein. A true and correct copy of the 2022 California
Administrative Code as adopted by this section shall be on file in the office
of the City Building Official for examination and use by the public.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
§ 150.06 BUILDING CODE.
   In order to regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, wiring,
plumbing, use, height, area, and maintenance of all buildings and structures
within the City of Riverbank, the 2022 Edition of the California Building Code,
Title 24, Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2, published by the International Code Council
(ICC), administrative sections, Chapter 29, Appendices A, C, and I; and
amendments, as adopted by the Building Standards Commission of the State of
California and codified at Title 24, Part 2 in the California Code of
Regulations, except as specifically repealed or amended by ordinance of the
City of Riverbank, is hereby adopted and made part of this chapter as though
set forth in full herein. A true and correct copy of the 2022 California
Building Code as adopted by this section shall be on file in the office of the
City Building Official for inspection by the public.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
§ 150.07 RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   The purpose of this Code is to establish minimum requirements to safeguard
the public health, safety, and general welfare through structural strength,
means of egress facilities, stability, access to persons with disabilities,
sanitation, adequate lighting, ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to
life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built
environment, and to provide safety to firefighters and emergency responders
during emergency operations. The provisions of this Code shall apply to the
construction, alteration, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use,
occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every detached one
and two single family dwellings, townhouse not more than three stories above
grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and structures accessory
thereto within the City of Riverbank. Therefore, the 2022 California
Residential Code, Title 24, Part 2.5, published by the International Code
Council (ICC), in the California Code of Regulations, except as specifically
repealed or amended by ordinance of the City of Riverbank, is hereby adopted
and made part of this chapter as though set forth in full herein. A true and
correct copy of the 2022 California Residential Code as adopted by this section
shall be on file in the office of the City Building Official for inspection by
the public.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
§ 150.08 GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE.
   (A)   In order to improve public health, safety, and general welfare by
enhancing the design and construction of buildings through the use of building
concepts having a reduced negative impact or positive environmental impact, and
encouraging sustainable construction practices within the City of Riverbank,
the 2022 Edition of the California Green Building Standards Code, Title 24,
Part 11 (also known as the CALGreen Code), published by the International Code
Council (ICC), in the California Code of Regulations, except as specifically
repealed or amended by ordinance of the City of Riverbank, is hereby adopted
and made part of this chapter as though set forth in full herein. The
provisions of this code shall apply to the planning, design, use, and occupancy
of every newly constructed building or structure, unless otherwise indicated in
this code, throughout the City of Riverbank. A true and correct copy of the
2022 California Green Building Standards Code as adopted by this section shall
be on file in the office of the City Building Official for inspection and use
by the public.
   (B)   This section shall be known as the Green Building Regulations of the
City of Riverbank and regulates the construction of new buildings within this
jurisdiction, except work located primarily in a public way, public utility
towers and poles, mechanical equipment not specifically regulated in the
California Green Building Code, and hydraulic flood control structures. The
Green Building Regulations shall also apply to city owned buildings.
   (C)   Where in any specific case, different sections of the Green Building
Regulations specify different materials, methods of construction, or other
requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict
between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific
requirement shall apply.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
§ 150.09 PLUMBING CODE.
   In order to provide minimum requirements and standards for the protection of
the public health, safety, and general welfare and to regulate the erection,
installation, alteration, addition, repair, relocation, replacement,
maintenance, and use of any plumbing system within the City of Riverbank, the
2022 Edition of the California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5 and all appendix
chapters, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical
Officials (IAPMO), as adopted by the Building Standards Commission of the State
of California and codified in the California Building Standards Code at Title
24, Part 5 of the California Code of Regulations, except as specifically
repealed or amended by ordinance of the City of Riverbank, is hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in full herein. A true and
correct copy of the 2022 California Plumbing Code as adopted by this section
shall be on file in the office of the City Building Official for inspection and
use by the public.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
§ 150.10 ELECTRICAL CODE.
   In order to provide minimum standards for the proper regulation of the
installation of electrical systems within the City of Riverbank, the 2022
Edition of the California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3, and all appendix
chapters, published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), as
adopted by the Building Standards Commission of the State of California and
codified in the California Building Standards Code at Title 24, Part 3, of the
California Code of Regulations, except as specifically repealed or amended by
ordinance of the City of Riverbank, is hereby adopted and made a part of the
chapter as though set forth in full herein. A true and correct copy of the 2022
California Electrical Code shall be in the office of the City Building Official
for inspection and use by the public.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
§ 150.11 FIRE CODE.
   In order to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, limb, health,
property, and public welfare from fire and explosive hazards arising from the
storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and
from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and
premises in the City of Riverbank, the 2022 California Fire Code, Title 24,
Part 9, including Appendix Chapter 4, Appendices A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, and
J, published by the International Code Council (ICC), in the California Code of
Regulations, as adopted by the Stanislaus Consolidated Fire Protection
District, except as specifically repealed or amended by ordinance of the City
of Riverbank, is hereby adopted and made part of this chapter as though set
forth in full herein. A true and correct copy of the 2022 California Fire Code
as adopted by this section shall be on file in office of the Building Official
for inspection by the public.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
§ 150.12 MECHANICAL CODE.
   (A)   In order to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, limb, health,
property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design,
construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation,
maintenance, and use of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems,
and other heat-producing appliances and systems within the City of Riverbank,
the 2022 Edition of the California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4, and all
appendix chapters, published by the International Association of Mechanical and
Plumbing Officials (IAPMO), as adopted by the Building Standards Commission of
the State of California and codified in the California Building Standards Code
at Title 24, Part 4 of the California Code of Regulations, except as
specifically repealed or amended by ordinance of the City of Riverbank, is
hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in full
herein. A true and correct copy of the 2022 California Mechanical Code as
adopted by this section shall be on file in the office of the City Building
Official for inspection and use by the public.
   (B)   Heating, cooling, and swimming pool equipment shall not be located
within the required five-foot side or rear yard setback as defined by the City
of Riverbank Zoning Ordinance for residential zonings.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
§ 150.13 ENERGY CODE.
   In order to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, limb, health,
property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design,
construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation,
maintenance and use of manufactured devices that have been certified by their
manufacturer to meet or exceed minimum specifications or efficiencies by the
California Energy Commission within the City of Riverbank, the 2022 Edition of
the California Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6, and all appendix chapters,
published by the International Code Council, as adopted by the Building
Standards Commission of the State of California and codified in the California
Building Standards Code at Title 24, Part 6 of the California Code of
Regulations, except as specifically repealed or amended by ordinance of the
City of Riverbank, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though
set forth in full herein. A true and correct copy of the 2022 California Energy
Code as adopted by this section shall be on file in the office of the City
Building Official for inspection and use by the public.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
§ 150.14 EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
   In order to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, limb, health,
property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design,
construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation,
maintenance, and use of existing buildings while reducing the risk of death or
injury that may result from the effects of earthquakes on existing unreinforced
masonry bearing wall buildings within the City of Riverbank, the 2022
California Existing Building Code, Title 24, Part 10, published by the
International Code Council (ICC), in the California Code of Regulations, except
as specifically repealed or amended by ordinance of the City of Riverbank, is
hereby adopted and made part of this chapter as though set forth in full
herein. A true and correct copy of the 2022 California Existing Building Code
as adopted by this section shall be on file in the office the of City Building
Official for inspection by the public.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
§ 150.15 HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE.
   In order to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, limb, health,
property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design,
construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation,
maintenance and use of historical buildings to provide solutions for the
preservation of qualified historical buildings or properties, to promote
sustainability, to provide access for persons with disabilities, to provide a
cost-effective approach to preservation, and to provide for the reasonable
safety of the occupants or users within the City of Riverbank, the 2022
California Historical Building Code, Title 24, Part 8, published by the
International Code Council (ICC), in the California Code of Regulations, except
as specifically repealed or amended by ordinance of the City of Riverbank, is
hereby adopted and made part of this chapter as though set forth in full
herein. A true and correct copy of the 2022 California Historical Building Code
as adopted by this section shall be on file in the office of the City Building
Official for inspection by the public.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
SOLAR/PHOTOVOLTAIC POWER SYSTEMS
§ 150.16 SOLAR/PHOTOVOLTAIC POWER SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Where installed. Solar photovoltaic power systems shall comply with
the requirements of the 2022 California Residential Code, 2022 California
Electrical Code, 2022 California Building Code, 2022 California Fire Code and
California State Fire Marshal Solar Photovoltaic Installation Guidelines (the
“Solar Photovoltaic Installation Guideline,” published April 22, 2008).
   (B)   The city may impose fees related to solar/photovoltaic power systems
and from time to time amend said fees by resolution.
   (C)   Small residential rooftop solar energy system review process.
      (1)   The following words and phrases as used in this section are defined
as follows:
         ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL. The utilization of one or more of the following:
            1.   E-mail;
            2.   The internet;
            3.   Facsimile.
         SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Includes all of the
following:
            1.   A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts
alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.
            2.   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state
fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by
the city and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of § 714 of the Civil Code, as
such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from
time to time.
            3.   A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex
family dwelling.
            4.   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum
legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction.
         SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1)
and (2) of subdivision (a) of § 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or
subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.
      (2)   Section 65850.5 of the California Government Code provides that in
developing an expedited permitting process, the city, county, or city and
county shall adopt a checklist of all requirements with which small rooftop
solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The
building official is hereby authorized and directed to develop and adopt such
checklist.
      (3)   The checklist shall be published on the city’s internet website.
The applicant may submit the permit application and associated documentation to
the city’s building division by personal or electronic submittal together with
any required permit processing and inspection fees. In the case of electronic
submittal, the electronic signature of the applicant on all forms, applications
and other documentation may be used in lieu of a wet signature.
      (4)   Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:
         (a)   Verify to the city’s reasonable satisfaction through the use of
standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the
small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to
transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system
to the building foundation; and
         (b)   At the applicant’s cost, verify to the city’s reasonable
satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing
electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as
well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the
existing electrical system’s current use, to carry all new photovoltaic
electrical loads.
      (5)   For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for
expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in
a timely manner and may include a consolidated inspection by the Building
Inspector and Fire Department designee. If a small residential rooftop solar
energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however,
the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this
subsection.
      (6)   An application that satisfies the information requirements in the
checklist, as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete.
Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the building official shall issue a
written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any
additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.
      (7)   Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and
supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the
checklist, the building official shall administratively approve the application
and issue all required permits or authorizations within one to three working
days in which the permit application is submitted. Such approval does not
authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system
to the local utility provider’s electricity grid. The applicant is responsible
for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
ELECTRIC VEHICLES
§ 150.17 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote and encourage the
use of electric vehicles by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting
process for electric vehicle charging stations while promoting public health
and safety and preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use
of such charging stations. This chapter complies with California Government
Code Section 65850.7.
   (B)   Definitions.
      ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL. The utilization of one or more of the following:
         (a)   Electronic mail or email;
         (b)   The internet;
         (c)   Facsimile.
      ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION or CHARGING STATION. Any level of
electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in
compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on
the effective date of this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source
outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.
      SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT. A significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health
or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete.
   (C)   Expedited permitting process. Consistent with Government Code Section
65850.7, the Building Official shall implement an expedited, streamlined
permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations, and adopt a
checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations
shall comply with in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited,
streamlined permitting process and checklist may refer to the recommendations
contained in the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle
Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in
California: Community Readiness Guidebook” as published by the Governor’s
Office of Planning and Research. The city’s adopted checklist shall be
published on the city’s website.
   (D)   Permit application processing.
      (1)   Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant
shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will
not have specific, adverse impact to public health
2018 S-16
   Building Regulations   6G
and safety and building occupants. Verification by the applicant includes but
is not limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system
wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by
charging station equipment and associated conduits; and areas of charging
station equipment and vehicle parking.
      (2)   A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in
the city’s adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and promptly processed.
Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the permit application and
supporting documents meet the requirements of the city adopted checklist, and
is consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the
Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7,
approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not
authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging
station until approval is granted by the city. If the Building Official
determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a
written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the
application and any additional information required to be eligible for
expedited permit issuance.
      (3)   Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building
Official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by
this section and associated supporting documentations. In accepting such permit
applications, the Building Official shall also accept electronic signatures on
all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by
any applicant.
   (E)   Technical review.
      (1)   It is the intent of this section to encourage the installation of
electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting for
charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the Building
Official’s authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. If the
Building Official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the
electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the
public health or safety, as defined in this chapter, the city/county may
require the applicant to apply for a conditional use permit.
      (2)   In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with
Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall not condition the
approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of
such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section
4080.
   (F)   Electric vehicle charging station installation requirements.
      (1)   Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the
requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive
Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited
testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public
Utilities Commission or a Municipal Electric Utility Company regarding safety
and reliability.
 
2018 S-16
6H   Riverbank - Land Usage
      (2)   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated
wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall
meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the
California Electrical Code.
      (3)   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be
incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical
services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code.
Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.
      (4)   Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle
charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or
Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the
manufacturer’s installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall
not adversely affect building elements.
   (G)   Any provision of the City of Riverbank Municipal Code or appendices
thereto, inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, to the extent of
such inconsistencies and no further, are hereby repealed or modified to that
extent necessary to effect the provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause,
or phrase of this chapter, or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion of this chapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares
that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase
be declared unconstitutional.
(Ord. 2017-008, passed 9-26-17)
SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT FEES
§ 150.30 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the Systems Development Fee
Ordinance of the city.
('67 Code, § 5-17-1) (Ord. 2015-016, passed 10-27-15)
§ 150.31 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The intent of this chapter is to ensure that new development bears a
proportionate share of the cost of city parks, water, sewer, storm water,
police, city administration, and transportation capital facilities. It is the
further intent of this chapter that new development pay for its fair share for
the development of these systems through the payment of fees. Furthermore, it
is the intent of this chapter that the System Development Fees imposed on new
development are no greater than necessary to defray the impacts directly
related to proposed new development.
   (B)   It is not the intent of this chapter that Impact Fees be used to
remedy any deficiency in system development existing on the effective date of
this chapter. Further, it is not the intent of this chapter that any monies
collected from any System Development Fee deposited in an System Development
Fee Fund Account ever be commingled with monies from a different Fund Account,
or ever be used for Capital Facilities that are different from that for which
the fee was paid.
   (C)   Particularly, the provisions of this subchapter are adopted for the
following reasons:
      (1)   To provide an adequate and constant method for the financing of the
unfunded portion of needed systems development costs throughout the city,
reasonably related to projected community growth.
      (2)   To promote the orderly and efficient expansion of public water,
wastewater, storm management and transportation systems to adequately meet the
domestic and economic needs of the community and to minimize adverse fiscal and
environmental impacts of new development.
      (3)   To insure the continuation of necessary level of services
including, but not limited to police and general administrative services.
      (4)   To establish equitable methods for allocating system development
costs to the city associated with new development.
      (5)   To regulate the development of land to ensure that new development
bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to
develop all necessary infrastructure systems in Riverbank as contemplated by
the General Plan.
      (6)   The General Plan establishes that land development shall not be
permitted unless adequate capital facilities and/or infrastructure exist or are
assured, and that land development shall bear a proportionate share of the cost
of the provision of the new or expanded capital facilities required by such
development.
      (7)   Other revenue sources are not sufficient to fund capital
improvements necessary to accommodate new system development.
      (8)   The General Plan establishes that System Development Fees are one
of the chosen methods of regulating land development in order to ensure that it
bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital facilities necessary to
accommodate the development and to promote and protect the public health,
safety, and welfare.
      (9)   The use of System Development Fees is a means to provide additional
resources for an adequate public infrastructure and services only as they
relate to the needs of new development.
      (10)   The use of System Development Fees is a standardized method for
ensuring that new development pays its fair share of the cost of public
infrastructure systems.
      (11)   System Development Fees are used in the development of the Capital
Improvement Program for financing public facilities, and ensure the adequacy of
public systems to serve development.
(Ord. 2015-016, passed 10-27-15)
§ 150.32 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, and resolutions adopted thereto,
certain words shall have the following meanings;
   BUILDING. Any new structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy, including those moved into the city limits; but not
including any outdoor tanks, towers, carports, or other similar structures.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM. The adopted schedule of all future projects
listed in order of construction priority together with cost estimates and the
anticipated means of financing each project. Included are all major projects
requiring the expenditure of public funds, over and above the city operating
expenses, for the purchase, construction, or replacement of physical assets for
the City of Riverbank.
   CHURCH. Structures primarily designed as a place for public worship.
   CITY ENGINEER. Persons employed or contracted by the city to perform
professional engineering work and/or administration and consulting work in the
design, investigation, and construction of street, utility, ground water and
wastewater treatment systems, and other public works projects; to prepare plans
and specifications; and to act as a project manager on assigned projects.
   COMMERCIAL. Those uses designated as permitted or conditional uses in the
SP, CX-1, C-1, C-2 and CM Zoning Districts of Chapter 153 except where such
uses involve the manufacture or assembly of a product or warehousing.
   CONSTRUCTION COST. The direct costs for labor, material, equipment, and
services; and other direct costs for the on-site erection, fabrication,
installation, alteration, demolition, or removal of any facility or addition
thereto, including all related activities, but not restricted to, clearing of
land, earth moving and landscaping. Construction cost does not include the
compensation paid to the architect and engineer and consultants, the cost of
the land, rights-of-way or other costs.
   DAY CARE CENTER. Structures (other than a family day care center) in which
persons not of the immediate family are provided with care for compensation for
a portion of the day not exceeding 12 hours in any 24-hour period.
   GOVERNMENT COST. Includes all direct and indirect costs to any part of the
City of Riverbank for the administration the System Development Fee Program.
These costs include, but are not limited to, an appropriate share of: physical
overhead, indirect costs including material and supply costs, utilities,
insurance, travel, rents, buildings, equipment, management, supervision,
enforcement, collection, research, establishment of standards, and regulation,
including any required environmental impact assessments necessary to support
the construction of SDF Program projects. Government Cost shall be determined
or estimated from the best available records of the City of Riverbank, and new
cost accounting systems need not be established solely for this purpose.
   HOSPITAL. An institution where the ill or injured may receive medical,
surgical, or psychiatric treatment, nursing care, food and lodging, and the
like.
   INDUSTRIAL. Those uses designated as permitted or conditional uses in the
SP, CM, M-l, and M-2 Zoning Districts of
Chapter 153, excluding all those uses which are permitted in any of the other
zones as set forth in Chapter 153 excepting warehouses.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A residential dwelling unit that cannot be sold
individually (for example, must be sold with at least one other dwelling unit
on a single parcel of land).
   PRIVATE SCHOOL. Includes those uses other than public uses offering
educational services and/or vocational training to students aged five years or
older but excluding child care facilities.
   RESIDENTIAL CARE HOME. Structures designed for use as a convalescent
hospital, or a retirement home, or a 24-hour care center for seven or more
persons in addition to members of the family.
   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a dwelling designed for
occupancy by one family for living or sleeping purposes, and having only one
kitchen.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A residential dwelling unit that may be sold
individually.
   SOFT COST. These costs are related to those items in a project that are
necessary to prepare and complete the non-construction needs of the project.
Soft costs include such items as architecture, design, engineering, permits,
inspections, consultants, environmental studies, financing, interest payments,
and regulatory demands needing approval before construction begins. Soft costs
do not include construction, telecommunications, furnishings, fixed equipment,
and expenditures or any other permanent components of the project.
   SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any building structure or other improvement constructed or
renovated by the city upon property owned by or under its control; or
      (2)   Any physical asset, including initial equipment or piece of
equipment, facility constructed or purchased, or land acquired necessary to
deliver public services for new growth or new development.
   SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT FEE. The fee charged for a change in use, new
construction, including the expansion of and/or the addition to an existing,
nonresidential structure, to mitigate the unfunded portion of the determined
impact of the development.
('67 Code, § 5-17-3) (Ord. 2015-016, passed 10-27-15)
§ 150.33 ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES.
   A systems development fee, as established from time to time by the City
Council by resolution, shall be due and payable as at time of building permit
issuance, unless deferred pursuant to action authorized by resolution of the
City Council.
('67 Code, § 5-17-4) (Ord. 2015-016, passed 10-27-15)
§ 150.34 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The systems development fee is intended to apply to all residential
construction and to all reconstruction, alteration, modification, and additions
which create additional dwelling units unless otherwise exempted under this
section.
   (B)   The systems development fee is intended to apply to any
intensification of use or the building of all new nonresidential construction
and to additional building area due to reconstruction, alteration,
modification, and additional nonresidential buildings.
   (C)   Square footage shall be determined by adding the number of square feet
of space on each floor or level.
   (D)   The fees imposed by this subchapter shall not be applicable to those
legal parcels on which a structure was previously situated but which was
destroyed by fire or other natural disaster, or which was removed or
demolished, provided:
      (1)   That a building permit to rebuild is obtained within one year of
the destruction, demolition or removal of the structure.
      (2)   That the permit to rebuild is obtained by the owner and/or
developer of record as of the date of the destruction, demolition or removal of
the structure.
      (3)   That the exemption will apply only to the extent that the permit to
rebuild is for the same number or fewer dwelling units (or, in the case of
nonresidential uses, the same number of square feet) as previously existed. The
fees imposed by this subchapter shall be applied to the extent that the permit
is for more units (or more square feet) than previously existed.
   (E)   Total System Development cost is equal to the sum of Construction
Cost, Soft Cost and Government Cost. For purposes of project reimbursement,
soft costs are limited to 35% of actual verified construction costs.
   (F)   System Development Fees are intended to represent new impacts on city
facilities. The City Council has the ability to allow for fee credits of
certain fee categories to match actual project related impacts on facilities.
Reductions should always be supported by written evidence which illustrates the
project demands on City Infrastructure for a given project. This might include
using actual vehicle trip data to suggest a lower transportation impact fee or
actual flow data to lower water, sewer or storm drainage fees. The Owner and/or
developer shall present evidence to the city demonstrating the new project
demand estimates which in turn will be reviewed by the City Engineer and City
Manager. The City Manager will make a recommendation to the City Council on the
requested fee reduction which will be reflected by a City Council vote on the
proposal which will recorded by minute action.
   (G)   Deferral of System Development Fees shall be approved by the City
Council and shall include the requirement for a deposit, payment of an
administrative expense and payment of a reasonable rate of interest for the
portion of the fee which is deferred. The deferment and interest and any
outstanding administrative expenses shall be paid prior to the final building
inspection and the entire deferment agreement shall be recorded as a lien
against the property to which the deferment is sought.
(Ord. 2015-016, passed 10-27-15)
§ 150.35 CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   The City Engineer may direct or authorize the owner and/or developer
to construct certain facilities specified in the System Development Fee
Analysis and/or described in the current Capital Improvement Program of the
city, or portions thereof, at the time and as designated in the study, in lieu
of all, or a portion of, the fee required by this chapter. The owner and/or
developer might be entitled to a credit if the owner and/or developer:
      (1)   Designs and constructs the improvements.
      (2)   Finances said improvements by cash, bond or other means approved by
the Council.
      (3)   A combination of the above. All improvements must be accepted for
maintenance by the City Council in order for credit to be accrued to the
project unless advanced fee credit is authorized by agreement approved by the
City Council.
   (B)   The credit to be provided to the property owner and/or developer shall
be determined by the City Engineer based on prevailing construction costs
consistent with the anticipated costs illustrated in the adopted System
Development Fee Study as may be modified from time to time. The final credit
amount shall be approved by the City Council. The construction of a facility
authorized by this section must consist of a usable facility or segment and be
approved by the city and constructed in accordance with the city's public
improvement design standards.
   (C)   If the amount of credit due is greater than the amount of System
Development Fees otherwise owed for the project, the city, at the City
Council's election, may elect to pay the difference from the appropriate
development impact fee fund, if funds are available, after the improvements
have been accepted by the city as complete. The city shall track and make
payments to the installer of facilities based on a strategy of first in line,
using the date the City Council accepts the improvements as indicator date. The
terms of the reimbursement obligation will be described in an agreement between
the developer and the city.
(Ord. 2015-016, passed 10-27-15)
§ 150.36 RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER EXISTING FEES.
   (A)   Park-in-lieu fees. The park-in-lieu (Quimby) fees are used for the
acquisition of neighborhood parkland while the System Development fee covers
the other capital items necessary for neighborhood park development including
soft and hardscape. Park-in-lieu fees are paid prior to the filing of a final
map in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance, §
152.037.
   (B)   Sewer connection charges. Sewer connection charges represent the costs
associated with the ability to serve a development. Sewer connection charges
are paid as required by
Chapter 51.
   (C)   Water connection charges. Water connection charges represent the costs
associated with the ability to serve a development. Water connection charges
are paid as required by
Chapter 52.
(Ord. 2015-016, passed 10-27-15)
§ 150.37 SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT FUND ESTABLISHED.
   All of the systems development charges collected shall be placed in one or
more special funds which are hereby created and established for such purposes
and which shall be known as the Systems Development Funds. Sums collected under
this chapter may only be expended for improvements intended for each System
Development Fund category as established by the City Council. The City Council
may, upon recommendation from the City Manager in consultation with the City
Finance Director, allow cross borrowing of funds only upon making the following
findings for over-riding need and necessity:
   (A)   The cross borrowing of funds will not adversely impact needed
improvements within existing established neighborhoods of the city identified
within the Capital Improvement Program of the city;
   (B)   The cross borrowing of funds will result in a more efficient
infrastructure system with lower operating costs than envisioned by the Capital
Improvement Program;
   (C)   The cross borrowing of funds will have a direct environmental benefit
than otherwise envisioned by the Capital Improvement Program; and
   (D)   The crossing borrowing of funds will not impact needed government and
public safety facilities identified within the Capital Improvement Program.
   (E)   If funds are allowed to be borrowed, then the request shall include a
repayment plan with the mechanisms and timing for the repayment of the funds
borrowed.
   (F)   During the construction of individual facilities identified in the
Capital Improvement Program, the City Manager shall have the authority to make
loans among the System Development Fee funds to assure adequate cash flow for
the construction if said public facility. The City Manager may only do so after
making a determination that the inter-fund loan does not interfere with the
scheduled Capital Improvement Program of the lending fund. Interest on each
loan shall be the same rate then earned on other city funds.
(Ord. 2015-016, passed 10-27-15)
§ 150.38 TRANSPORTATION, PARKS, WATER, SEWER AND STORM SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT FEE
CREDITS.
   (A)   A property owner and/or developer or developer who constructs a
qualified public improvement to either the transportation, parks, sanitary
sewer, storm water or the water system may be eligible for a credit to be
applied against the appropriate category of the System Development Fee (SDF). A
qualified public improvement, as referenced, means a capital improvement that
is:
      (1)   Required as a condition of development approval;
      (2)   Is identified in the transportation, park, water, wastewater or
storm system master plans; and
      (3)   Is either: (a) not located within or immediately adjacent to
property that is the subject of development approval, or is (b) located in
whole or in part within or immediately adjacent to property that is subject to
development approval and is required to be constructed by the particular
development project to which the SDF is related.
   (B)   A public improvement that is eligible for SDF credit is one that is
designed and built in accordance with the appropriate utility master plan and/
or identified within the Capital Improvement Program of the city.
Infrastructure lines that are sized to accommodate a developer's individual
service and fire protection needs do not qualify for SDF credits. SDF credits
are possible only for projects identified in the adopted SDF program (Nexus
Analysis).
   (C)   Establishing and recording System Development Fee credits:
      (1)   The property owner and/or developer or developer shall submit a
written request for an evaluation of SDF credits at the same time as they make
the application for Public Improvement Plan Review.
      (2)   The written request shall include the engineer's detailed
construction cost estimate for the qualified infrastructure to be constructed.
      (3)   The method for estimating eligible SDF credits will be determined
by comparing the project engineers cost estimate against current water and
sewer construction costs developed by the City Engineer.
      (4)   Once the Developer has completed construction of the
infrastructure, and before the improvements have been accepted by the city, the
City Engineer may request documentation of final construction costs to verify
actual costs. Actual construction bids shall be provided by the developer and
shall consist of certified payment statements for materials and construction.
If the actual construction costs are less than or equal to the construction
cost estimates that the system development fee credits were based on, the
agreement amount(s) will be revised accordingly. If the final construction
costs exceed the construction estimates agreed to by the City Engineer and/or
as provided in the adopted SDF Program, as modified from time to time by the
City Council, the original agreement amount might be modified to reflect the
extra costs. Any expense in excess of the costs adopted in the SDF Program will
be forfeited by the owner and/or developer unless the City Council agrees to
some other form of reimbursement like an area of benefit.
(Ord. 2015-016, passed 10-27-15)
STREET IMPROVEMENTS
§ 150.55 PURPOSE; PERMITS REQUIRED.
   The purposes of this subchapter are to provide for and safeguard life,
health, property and the public welfare by maintaining and improving the
standards of thoroughfares, for the public safety and for the protection of
public investment in existing streets and highways. Permits are required for
such improvements and shall be issued through the City Building Inspection
Department prior to commencement of construction.
(`67 Code, § 5-6-1) (Ord. 80-4, passed 4-14-80)
§ 150.56 REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   No building permit, when such permit is required by the provisions of this
code, shall be issued for the erection or construction, or the moving onto any
land, of any building or structure, or for the remodeling or converting of any
building or structure when the reasonable value thereof, as determined under
the standards set forth in the most recent edition of the Uniform Building Code
of the International Conference of Building Officials, exceeds $10,000, unless
concrete curbs and gutters, sidewalks, standard driveway approaches and
matching pavement are provided, except as follows:
   (A)   Lots having a frontage of 200 feet or more on a public maintained
street or highway and where only one single-family dwelling is to be
constructed and structures for uses appurtenant thereto.
   (B)   When the Director of Public Works finds that the installation of
concrete curb and gutter and sidewalk, standard driveway approaches and/or
matching pavement is undesirable or unfeasible due to the possibility of
increased traffic hazards, bad drainage, difficulties for on-street parking,
driveway access, or the establishment of grade lines; or any other condition
which the Director of Public Works deems justifiable in delaying such street
improvements until the public maintained thoroughfare is reconstructed, the
owner shall deposit a sum of money, surety bond, or an approved instrument of
credit, in an amount set by the Director of Public Works equal to the estimated
cost of the improvements, which may be retained and used by the city to make
such improvements, after regrading or reconstruction has been done or other
need for postponement has been eliminated or has ceased to exist.
   (C)   In the case of lots having a street or road frontage of less than 200
feet, which are of legal record on the effective date of this subchapter, and
for which no official street plan and profile providing for adequate drainage
or street width has been adopted by the City Council or for other reasons as
determined by the City Engineer for which a delay in the installation of such
improvements would be of advantage to the city, a recordable deferred street
improvement agreement providing for the installation of concrete curb, gutter,
matching pavement and sidewalk (when required by this code) and specifying a
sum to be expended for improvements in an amount set by the City Engineer,
equal to his estimate of the cost of such improvements, plus 15% for each full
year installation of improvements is deferred, may be executed in lieu of
making such improvements. Such agreement shall be in form as approved by the
City Attorney and as accepted on behalf of the city by the City Engineer or his
authorized deputy, and when recorded shall constitute a lien upon the property.
      (1)   The agreement shall be performed and complied with upon demand of
the Director of Public Works after a finding by the City Council that one or
more of the conditions listed below is applicable:
         (a)   A satisfactory drainage system exists, with direct benefit to
such lot, which will accommodate surface storm water to the established
community standard.
         (b)   The public maintained thoroughfare abutting the lot is to be or
has been reconstructed to a satisfactory grade.
         (c)   50% of the frontage of a particular block on the side of the
street on which the lot is located has curb, gutter, sidewalk and matching
pavement installed or the owners of such percentage of frontage have agreed to
install such improvements by agreements executed pursuant to the provisions of
this division. For purposes hereof, block shall be the distance on one side of
a street between two intersecting streets as shown on the recorded subdivision
map, or 1,000 feet, whichever is less. The City Engineer shall establish the
limits of the 1,000 feet, for the purpose of determining that 50% of frontage
is or will be improved. In the case of a cul-de-sac or dead-end street, block
shall mean the distance along one side of the street for not more than 1,000
feet, as determined by the City Engineer.
         (d)   That special circumstances exist which justify requiring
immediate construction of street improvements.
      (2)   The Director of Public Works shall give 30 days notice, in writing,
to the owner of the property to install the required improvements.
      (3)   If the owner of the property refuses or neglects to install the
required improvements within such period of 30 days, the agreement may be
referred to the City Attorney for action for enforcement of the lien thereof,
or the improvements may be installed by the Department of Public Works and the
cost thereof shall become a lien and charge upon the property and collectable
in the same manner as unpaid taxes, together with the costs of collection.
      (4)   Upon the satisfactory completion of the obligation or a
substitution of the agreement by a cash deposit with the city as provided in
the agreement, the city shall record a release and satisfaction exonerating the
agreement and lien thereof.
(`67 Code, § 5-6-2) (Ord. 86-19, passed 8-25-86)
§ 150.57 PLAN AND PROFILE REQUIRED.
   If improvements are required, pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter
or any other provision of this code, plan and profile of proposed street
improvements, prepared by a licensed civil engineer, shall be submitted to the
City Engineer for review and approval prior to the issuance of a building
permit. All improvements shall be completed prior to final approval of the
building or structure by the Building Inspector, unless he shall find that by
reason of special circumstances completion thereof may be postponed, but in
such event, cash in an amount set by the Director of Public Works equal to the
estimated cost of the improvements shall first be deposited with the city.
(`67 Code, § 5-6-3)
§ 150.58 LAND DEDICATION.
   The city shall require dedication of land for street or highway purposes to
achieve conformance with the general plan of the city, prior to issuance of
building permit, or the city may accept in lieu thereof an agreement to make
such dedication in form and substance as approved by the City Attorney.
(`67 Code, § 5-6-4)
§ 150.59 APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any permit applicant, if of the opinion that any decision,
determination, or requirement of the Building Inspector, City Engineer, or
Director of Public Works is an improper application of this subchapter or not
legally justified, may appeal to the City Council.
   (B)   All appeals taken under this section must be taken within 30 days
after the decision, determination, or statement of requirement by filing with
the office of the City Clerk a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The City Clerk shall notify the city official involved of the filing
of such appeal, and the official shall forthwith transmit to the City Clerk all
the papers constituting the file and records upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
   (C)   The City Clerk, upon the filing of such appeal, shall place the matter
upon the agenda for the next regular meeting of the City Council occurring not
earlier than five days after the filing of appeal, and shall notify the
appealing permit applicant by letter of the meeting date and place at which the
appeal will be heard. The decision of the City Council upon the appeal shall be
final.
(`67 Code, § 5-6-5) (Ord. 80-4, passed 4-14-80)
VACANT BUILDINGS
§ 150.70 FINDINGS; VACANT OR BOARDED BUILDINGS.
   The City Council finds as follows:
      (A)   Vacant and boarded buildings are a major cause and source of blight
in residential and non-residential neighborhoods. This is particularly true
when the owner of the vacant building fails to maintain and manage the building
to ensure that it does not become a liability to the neighborhood. Vacant
buildings can attract transients and criminals. Use of vacant buildings by
transients and criminals, who frequently employ primitive cooking or heating
methods, creates a risk of fire for the vacant building and adjacent
properties. Vacant properties are often used as dumping grounds for junk and
debris and are often overgrown with weeds and grass. Vacant buildings which are
boarded up to prevent entry by transients and other long-term vacancies
discourage economic development and limit appreciation of property values.
   (B)   Based on the likely economic and public health, welfare, and safety
problems caused by vacant buildings, the city needs to monitor the status of
vacant buildings so that they do not become attractive nuisances, are not used
by trespassers, are properly maintained both inside and out, and do not become
a blighting influence in the city. City departments involved in such monitoring
include the Police, Public Works and Building Departments and the Code
Enforcement Division. There is a substantial cost to the city for monitoring
vacant buildings, whether or not those buildings are boarded up. It is the
responsibility of property owners to prevent property they own from becoming a
burden to the neighborhood and community and a threat to the public health,
safety, or welfare, and any costs to the city for monitoring vacant buildings
should be borne by those owners.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
§ 150.71 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction of
this chapter.
   BLIGHT shall mean a condition of decay, deterioration, disrepair, neglect or
inadequate maintenance, including, but not limited to, conditions constituting
a public nuisance pursuant to §
98.03 of this Code, contributing to the diminution of the property values of
surrounding properties, undermining the economic vitality of a neighborhood or
creating health or safety dangers.
   BOARDED BUILDING or BOARDED UP shall mean a building, any of the doors or
windows of which have been covered with plywood or other material.
   VACANT BUILDING or VACANT shall mean a building which is without a legal
resident or occupant or which is not being put to a lawful commercial or
industrial use.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
§ 150.72 VACANT OR BOARDED BUILDING MONITORING PROGRAM.
   (A)   Monitoring program. The City Manager or their designee shall be
responsible for administering a vacant or boarded building monitoring program
for identifying and monitoring the maintenance of all vacant or boarded
buildings in the city. Any building, residential or non-residential, which is
boarded up by voluntary action of the owner or as a result of enforcement
activities by the city or is vacant for more than 90 days for any reason, must
register for the program. Every owner of a vacant or boarded building that is
registered in the program shall be subject to a monthly fee in an amount set by
resolution of the City Council not to exceed the reasonable cost of monitoring
the vacant or boarded building, and must submit a rehabilitation plan
containing:
      (1)   A statement outlining the property owner's plan, if applicable, for
repairing the premises for occupants, meeting all applicable codes, offering
the premises for sale, lease, or rent, or actively maintaining and monitoring
the premises; and
      (2)   The expected timeline for completing any actions listed above.
   (B)    Fee waiver. The vacant or boarded building monitoring program fee may
be waived by the City Manager or their designee upon a showing by the owner
that:
      (1)   The owner has obtained a building permit and is progressing
diligently to repair the premises for occupancy.
      (2)   The building meets all applicable codes and is actively being
offered for sale, lease or rent.
      (3)   The City Manager or their designee determines that the building
does not contribute to, and is not likely to contribute to blight, because the
owner is actively maintaining and monitoring the building so that it does not
contribute to blight. Active maintenance and monitoring shall include:
         (a)   Maintenance of landscaping and plant materials in good
condition.
         (b)   Maintenance of the exterior of the building, including but not
limited to paint and finishes, in good condition.
         (c)   Regular removal of all exterior trash, debris, and graffiti.
         (d)   Maintenance of the building in continuing compliance with all
applicable codes and regulations.
         (e)   Prevention of criminal activity on the premises, including, but
not limited to, use and sale of controlled substances, prostitution, and
criminal street gang activity.
   (C)   Procedure. The vacant or boarded building monitoring program fee shall
be billed to the owner of the property and mailed to the owner’s address as set
forth on the last equalized assessment roll of the County Assessor.
      (1)   Any owner billed may apply for a waiver on the grounds set forth in
division (B) of this section by submitting a written statement of the grounds
for the waiver, and the owner's daytime telephone number, to the City Manager
or their designee within 30 days after the billing is mailed to the owner. The
City Manager or their designee shall review the written statement and may
contact the owner to discuss the application for waiver. The City Manager or
their designee shall prepare a written decision which shall be mailed to the
owner.
      (2)   Any owner who disagrees with the decision of the City Manager or
their designee relating to an application for waiver may appeal by submitting a
written appeal hearing request to the City Clerk within 30 days of receipt of
the City Manager or their designee's decision. The hearing shall be set and
conducted pursuant to §§
99.06 and
99.07 of this Code.
   (D)   Collection. If the monthly fee is not paid within 90 working days
after billing, or within 60 days after the decision of the City Manager or
their designee or the outcome of an appeal hearing, the fee may be collected
through a lien pursuant to §
99.16 of this Code.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
§ 150.73 FAILURE TO REGISTER FOR MONITORING PROGRAM.
   Failing to register for the vacant or boarded building monitoring program as
required in §
150.72 within 30 days of a building becoming vacant or boarded as defined in §
150.71 shall constitute a violation of these provisions subject to
administrative penalty.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
§ 150.74 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Upon a property owner failing to register as required under §
150.72, the City Manager, or their designee shall issue a notice of violation
directed to the record owner of the premises. The notice of violation shall
contain:
      (1)   The street address and such other description as is required to
identify the premises.
      (2)   A statement specifying the conditions which constitute a violation
of this chapter.
      (3)   A statement that administrative penalties may begin to accrue upon
the expiration of the 30 day correction period if the property owner does not
register for the vacant or boarded building monitoring program. The statement
shall state that the 30 day correction period begins on the date of the
issuance of the notice of violation. The statement shall identify the date of
issuance.
      (4)   A statement that upon registering into the vacant or boarded
building monitoring program, the property owner shall be subject to a monthly
fee and must submit a rehabilitation plan as specified in §
150.72(A).
      (5)   A statement notifying the property owner that he or she may request
a hearing within 20 calendar days of the mailing of the notice to dispute the
existence of any violation or to show cause why an administrative penalty
should not be assessed in accordance with this Code. The statement shall notify
the property owner that the 30 day correction period shall be suspended from
the date of a request for a hearing until such time as the hearing officer
renders a decision.
         (6)   A statement notifying the property owner that he or she may
request an extension as provided for in §
150.78.
   (B)   The notice of violation, and any amended or supplemental notice, shall
be served either by personal delivery or by return receipt mailing upon the
record owner at his or her address as it appears on the latest equalized
assessment roll of Stanislaus County, or as known to the City Manager or their
designee. A copy of the notice and any amended or supplemental notice shall
also be posted on the building.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
§ 150.75 PERMITTED TIME PERIODS TO COMMENCE AND CORRECT VIOLATIONS.
   Any owner of a vacant or boarded building in violation of §
150.72 shall register for the vacant or boarded building monitoring program
within 30 days of the date of the issuance of the notice of violation. The date
of the issuance of the notice of violation shall be the date the notice of
violation is mailed to the property owner or posted on the property as provided
for in §
150.74, whichever is earlier. Provided the property owner diligently pursues
registration into the program, no administrative penalties shall be imposed. In
the event the property owner does not request a hearing or correct the
violation within 30 days of the date of the issuance of the notice of
violation, the city may impose administrative penalties as provided for in §
150.80. In the event the property owner requests a hearing, the 30-day
correction period shall be suspended from the date of the request until such
time as a decision is rendered. Upon the issuance of a decision, the property
owner shall have the balance of the original 30-day period to commence any
necessary corrections or repairs before administrative penalties accrue.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
§ 150.76 SECURING VACANT BUILDINGS.
   In administering the vacant or boarded building monitoring program, the City
Manager or their designee may impose such requirements to secure the property
as deemed reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare. The City Manager or their designee shall notify the affected property
owner of the decision to impose securing requirements in writing. Any owner who
disagrees with the decision of the City Manager or their designee relating to
any securing requirements may appeal by submitting a written appeal hearing
request to the City Clerk within 30 days of receipt of the written notice
imposing securing requirements on the property. The hearing shall be set and
conducted pursuant to §§
99.06 and
99.07 of this Code.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
§ 150.77 OPPORTUNITY FOR HEARING.
   Hearings shall be scheduled and conducted as provided for in §§
99.06 and
99.07 of this Code.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
§ 150.78 EXTENSION.
   The City Manager or their designee may, upon request of the owner of the
premises grant a 30-day extension for good cause shown. The City Manager or
their designee may grant one extension for each property in violation of these
provisions. Administrative penalties shall not accrue during the extension
period.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
§ 150.79 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   (A)   If the property owner requests a hearing, the appeal hearing body may,
with the consent of the owner, inspect the building and premises involved in
the hearing prior to, during or after the hearing, provided that:
      (1)   Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the
inspection is made;
      (2)   The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the
inspection; and
      (3)   The hearing body shall state for the record during the hearing, if
requested, or file a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the
hearing record, upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed,
and the conclusion drawn therefrom.
   (B)   The owner shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters stated by
the hearing body pursuant to division (A) either for the record during the
hearing or by filing a written statement within five days after the hearing for
inclusion in the hearing record.
   (C)   An inspection warrant or the owner's consent to inspect the building
and surrounding properties is required unless such inspection can be made from
areas in which the general public has access or with permission of other
persons authorized to provide access to the property on which the building is
located.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
§ 150.80 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY.
   (A)   Any owner of a vacant or boarded building who has failed to register
for the vacant or boarded building monitoring program and who has failed to
commence corrections within the correction period established under §
150.75 or any extension as provided for in §
150.78, shall be liable for administrative penalties.
   (B)   Any violation of §§
150.72 and
150.73 shall be a misdemeanor. Any administrative penalty imposed pursuant to
this chapter shall be in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per building for each
violation. Pursuant to §
99.09(G), each and every day, or portion thereof, of continuing violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
§ 150.81 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY; FACTORS.
   In setting the penalty, the City Manager or their designee shall consider
factors including, but not limited to: the severity, extent and length of time
in which the blighting conditions have existed on the property; the owner's
efforts, or lack thereof, to remedy the problem; staff time and costs incurred
in investigating the conditions; and the extent, if any, to which an
administrative penalty would impose a substantial economic hardship on the
owner or would hinder the rehabilitation of the building.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
§ 150.82 PAYMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY.
   (A)   Upon the expiration of the 30-day correction period, or any applicable
30-day extension, whichever is applicable, the city shall send the property
owner a letter notifying him or her of any administrative penalties being
imposed. The administrative penalty shall become due and payable within 30 days
of the mailing of the letter notifying the property owner of the administrative
penalty.
   (B)   If the administrative penalty is not timely paid, the city may
initiate action to collect the penalty by the remedies and procedures provided
for in
Chapter 99.
   (C)   An administrative penalty shall accrue interest at the same annual
rate as any civil judgment. Interest shall accrue commencing on the thirty-
first day following the date the penalty is due and payable as provided for in
division (A) of this section.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
§ 150.83 AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE AGENT TO RESUME UTILITY SERVICE.
   The owner of a vacant building may designate in writing to the city an agent
to authorize the resumption of city utility service to the property. However,
this section shall not be interpreted to reduce or eliminate outstanding debts,
fees or costs the owner or agent may be required to pay prior to city utility
service connection.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
§ 150.84 PENALTIES CUMULATIVE.
   Unless otherwise expressly provided, the remedies, procedures, and penalties
provided by this chapter are cumulative to each other and to any others
available under State law or other city ordinances.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 5-23-23)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Statement of purpose
   
151.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
151.05   Definitions
   
151.06   Lands to which chapter applies
   
151.07   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
151.08   Compliance
   
151.09   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.10   Interpretation
   
151.11   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
151.20   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
151.21   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
151.22   Development permit
   
151.23   Appeals
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.30   Standards of construction
   
151.31   Standards for utilities
   
151.32   Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development
   
151.33   Standards for manufactured homes
   
151.34   Standards for recreational vehicles
   
151.35   Floodways
Variance Procedure
   
151.45   Nature of variances
   
151.46   Conditions for variances
   
151.47   Appeal Board
   
151.48   Development in flood hazard zone
Cross-reference:
    Flood plain zoning regulations, see §§
153.150 and
153.151
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the State of California has in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65302,
65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council does hereby adopt the following
floodplain management regulations.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated,
flood-proofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities also contributes to the flood losses.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied
uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned and
within flood prone, mudslide (i.e. mudflow) or flood related erosion areas.
These regulations are designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted
areas caused by flood damage;
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this subchapter includes regulations
to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases
in erosion or flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A ZONE. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that is either:
      (1)   Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or
      (2)   A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than 150 square
feet and $1,500 in value.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   ALLUVIAL FAN. A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped
deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from
mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley
floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris
flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
   APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly
defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized
by ponding or sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year (also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD). Base flood is the term used
throughout this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface
elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade i.e., below
ground level on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured  homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before January 27, 1997.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD, FLOODING, or FLOOD WATER.
      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and
      (2)   The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY and FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.
   FLOOD HAZARD ZONE. An area subject to flooding that is delineated as either
a special hazard area or an area of moderate or minimal hazard on an official
Flood Insurance Rate Map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The
identification of flood hazard zones does not imply that areas outside the
flood hazard zones, or uses permitted within flood hazards, will be free from
flooding or flood damage.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. See FLOODING.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The Building Official of the city a power of which
is to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited
to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of
police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term
describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which
provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing,
see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. That area of the floodplain on either side of the
regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted.
   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION. For purposes of §
151.45, that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of
the public. In examining this requirement, the City Council will consider the
fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities
and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are
permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during
all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of
the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs,
inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring.
In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is
subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood
insurance rates.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that
is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
   HARDSHIP. For the purposes of §
151.45, the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the
requested variance. The City Council requires that the variance be exceptional,
unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial
hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations,
physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors
likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these
problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even
if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
   LEVEE. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement (see BASEMENT definition).
      (1)   An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor
that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor
provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements including,
but not limited to:
         (a)   The wet flood openings standard in §
151.30(C)(3);
         (b)   The anchoring standards in §
151.30(A);
         (c)   The construction materials and methods standards in §
151.30(B); and
         (d)   The standards for utilities in §
151.31.
      (2)   For residential structures, all sub-grade enclosed areas are
prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see BASEMENT definition).
This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term does not
include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. Defined in the city substantial damage/improvement procedures.
See §
151.04.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, means structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after January 27, 1997 and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after January 27,
1997.
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD. See BASE FLOOD.
   PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community’s floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation
of those floodplain management regulations.
   PUBLIC SAFETY and NUISANCE. For the purposes of §
151.06, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which
is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any
considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or
use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream,
canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-
duty-truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is
not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may
be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from
flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM
as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the
permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground;
this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or
other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains
of coastal or riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.06 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city shown in an FHFM or FIRM as Zone A or AE.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated September 25,
2003 and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated September 25, 2003, and all subsequent amendments
and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of
applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other
areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to
the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs
are on file at Riverbank City Hall Administration, 6707 Third Street,
Riverbank, California, 95367.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.08 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and
other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the
City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.09 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.10 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.11 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the City Council, any officer or
employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.20 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Manager is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce
this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its
provisions.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.21 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to the following.
   (A)   Permit review. Review all development permits to determine:
      (1)   Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including
determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing
structures;
      (2)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
      (3)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding;
      (4)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a
floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the city; and
      (5)   All letter of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are
approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not
be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved
CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land
preparation as specified in the start of construction definition.
   (B)   Development of substantial improvement and substantial damage
procedures.
      (1)   Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, “Answers to Questions About
Substantially Damaged Buildings.” develop detailed procedures for identifying
and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial
damage, to include defining market value.
      (2)   Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions
and implemented by community staff.
   (C)   Review, use and development of other base flood data.
      (1)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with §
151.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or
state agency, or other source, in order to administer §
151.30.
      (2)   Note: a base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two
methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA-265, Managing Floodplain Development in
Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year)
Flood Elevations, dated July 1995.
   (D)   Notification of other agencies.
      (1)   Alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
         (a)   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of
Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;
         (b)   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and
         (c)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained.
      (2)   Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations.
         (a)   Within six months of information becoming available or project
completion, whichever comes first, the Floodplain Administrator shall submit or
assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA
for a letter of map revision (LOMR).
         (b)   All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the
issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued on
conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow
construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as
specified in the start of construction definition.
         (c)   Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of
those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and
floodplain management requirements are based on current data.
      (3)   Changes in corporate boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever
the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and
include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate
limits.
   (E)   Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain for
public inspection and make available as needed the following:
      (1)   Certification required by §§
151.22 and
151.22(E) (lowest floor elevations);
      (2)   Certification required by §
151.30(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);
      (3)   Certification required by §
151.30(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard);
      (4)   Certification of elevation required by §
151.32(A)(3) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards);
      (5)   Certification required by §
151.35(B) (floodway encroachments); and
      (6)   Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification
for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report
submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (F)   Map determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions.
The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
151.23.
   (G)   Remedial action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as
specified in §
151.08.
   (H)   Biennial report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA.
   (I)   Planning. Assure community’s General Plan is consistent with
floodplain management objectives herein.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.22 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other
development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood
hazard established in §
151.07. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the city. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information:
   (A)   Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:
      (1)   Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question,
existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their
location;
      (2)   Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other
utilities;
      (3)   Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any
proposed fill, and drainage facilities;
      (4)   Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;
      (5)   Base flood elevation information as specified in §
151.07 or §
151.21(C);
      (6)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
flood (including basement) of all structures; and
      (7)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in §
151.30(C)(2) and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 393.
   (B)   Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the
nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in §
151.30(C)(2).
   (C)   For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of
foundation openings as required in §
151.30 and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93.
   (D)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
   (E)   All appropriate certifications listed in §
151.21.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.23 APPEALS.
   The City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is
an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.30 STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
   (A)   Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of
structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
   (B)   Construction materials and methods. All new construction and
substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be
constructed:
      (1)   With flood resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation;
      (2)   Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      (3)   With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding; and
      (4)   Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (C)   Elevation and floodproofing.
      (1)   Residential construction.
         (a)   All new construction or substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest flood, including basement:
            1.   In AE, AH, A1-30 Zones, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation.
            2.   In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a
height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or
elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number
is specified.
            3.   In an A zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM (unnumbered A
zone) elevated to or above the base flood elevation, as determined under §
151.14(C).
         (b)   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the
lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil
engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building
inspector to be property elevated. The certification and verification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
      (2)   Nonresidential construction. All new construction or substantial
improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform
to §
151.30(C)(1); or
         (a)   Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the elevation recommended under §
151.30(C)(1), so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         (c)   Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that
the standards of §
151.30(C)(2)(a) and (C)(2)(b) are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   Flood openings. All new construction and substantial improvements
of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest flood (excluding
basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the
following minimum criteria.
         (a)   For non-engineered openings.
            1.   Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding;
            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade;
            3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwater; and
            4.   Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings
on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly enter; or
         (b)   Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.
      (4)   Manufactured homes. See §
151.33.
      (5)   Garages and low cost accessory structures.
         (a)   Attached garages.
            1.   A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with
the garage flood slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the
automatic entry of flood waters (see §
151.30(C)(3)). Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood
resistant materials (see §
151.30(B)).
            2.   A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the
above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking
areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6.
         (b)   Detached garages and accessory structures.
            1.   Accessory structures used solely for parking (two car detached
garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in §
151.05, may be constructed such that its flood is below the base flood
elevation (BFE) provided the structure is designed and constructed in
accordance with the following requirements:
               a.   Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking
or limited storage;
               b.   The portions of the accessory structure located below the
BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials;
               c.   The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
               d.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory
structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE;
               e.   The accessory structure must comply with floodplain
encroachment provisions in §
151.35; and
               f.   The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the
automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with §
151.30(C)(3).
            2.   Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the
above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards
in §
151.30.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.31 STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.
   (A)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate:
      (1)   Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
      (2)   Discharge from the systems into flood waters.
   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them, or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.32 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development,
including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivision, greater than
50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:
      (1)   Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood
elevations (BFE).
      (2)   Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures
and pads on the final plans.
      (3)   If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following
as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered
civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application
for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the Floodplain
Administrator:
         (a)   Lowest floor elevation;
         (b)   Pad elevation; and
         (c)   The lowest adjacent grade.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (D)   All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate
drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.33 STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on
sites located:
      (1)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
      (2)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
      (3)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
      (4)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon
which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a
flood, shall within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance
Rate Map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of
the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
   (B)   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH,
and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the
provisions of division (A) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be
elevated so that either the:
      (1)   Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood
elevation; or
      (2)   Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36
inches in height above grade.
   (C)   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be
properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.34 STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either:
   (A)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
   (B)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions; or
   (C)   Meet the permit requirements of §
151.22 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in §
151.33(A).
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.35 FLOODWAYS.
   Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood
waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the
following provisions apply:
   (A)   Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction,
substantial development or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the city.
   (B)   Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city shall prohibit
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and
other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is
provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (C)   If divisions (A) and (B) are satisfied, all new construction,
substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with
all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of §
151.30.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
VARIANCE PROCEDURE
§ 151.45 NATURE OF VARIANCES.
   (A)   The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only.
Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk
and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.
   (B)   The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the
general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property
and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of
property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the
applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants, or the property owners.
   (C)   It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its citizens from
flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from
the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite
rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can
only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance
guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple
provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The
criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives
other than a variance are more appropriate.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.46 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-
half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the
procedures of §§
151.20 and
151.30 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
   (B)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures (as defined in §
151.05) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   (C)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (D)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
MINIMUM NECESSARY means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the
requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an
elevation requirement, this means the City Council need not grant permission
for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the
applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City Council believes
will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.
   (E)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be
recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the Stanislaus County
Clerk Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the
chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
   (F)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances
issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.47 APPEAL BOARD.
   (A)   In passing upon requests for variances, the City Council shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this chapter, and the:
      (1)   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
      (2)   Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property;
      (4)   Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
      (5)   Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (6)   Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      (7)   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
      (10)   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
      (11)   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.
   (B)   Variances shall only be issued upon a:
      (1)   Showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
      (3)   Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense, create a nuisance (see definition of public safety and
nuisance), cause fraud and victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement,
and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally
dependent use provided that the provisions of §
151.46 are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected
by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not
result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public
nuisance.
   (D)   Upon consideration of the factors of §
151.45 and the purposes of this chapter, the City Council may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-002, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 151.48 DEVELOPMENT IN FLOOD HAZARD ZONE.
   (A)   Development of land, including but not limited to Development
Agreements, Tentative Subdivision Maps, Parcel Maps, discretionary approvals
and ministerial approvals for residential units, shall not be approved until
any applicable findings required in
Chapter 153, §
153.382 have been made.
(Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Title; supplementary provisions
   
152.002   Definitions
   
152.003   Purpose
   
152.004   Advisory Agency designated
   
152.005   Authority of City Council
   
152.006   Compliance required
   
152.007   Action by interested persons
   
152.008   Denials not to be resubmitted for one year
   
152.009   CATV facilities
   
152.010   Inapplicability
   
152.011   Relationship to zoning ordinance
   
152.012   Subdivisions in flood hazard zones
General Design Regulations
   
152.025   Standards and approval
   
152.026   Street design and standards
   
152.027   Alleys
   
152.028   Blocks
   
152.029   Lots
   
152.030   Easements
   
152.031   Underground utilities
   
152.032   Service roads
   
152.033   Watercourses
   
152.034   Sewage disposal
   
152.035   Reservations
   
152.036   School site dedication
   
152.037   Park and recreation dedication and fees
   
152.038   Drainage facilities
   
152.039   Street trees
   
152.040   Railroad crossings
   
152.041   Monuments
   
152.042   Energy conservation
   
152.043   Centralized mail delivery
   
152.044   Water and sewer service
Tentative Maps for Subdivisions Other than Parcel Maps
   
152.055   Tentative maps required
   
152.056   Filing; departmental approval
   
152.057   Form of tentative map
   
152.058   Statement in writing
   
152.059   Action on tentative map
   
152.060   Vesting tentative map
Final Maps
   
152.070   Filing; time limit
   
152.071   Fees
   
152.072   Form of final map
   
152.073   Certificates
   
152.074   Action on final map
   
152.075   Subdivision agreement
   
152.076   Improvement security
   
152.077   Correction and amendment of maps
Parcel Maps
   
152.090   Parcel maps required
   
152.091   Tentative parcel map filing; departmental approval
   
152.092   Form of tentative parcel map
   
152.093   Action on tentative parcel map
   
152.094   Filing; time limit
   
152.095   Issuance of building permits
   
152.096   Correction and amendment of maps
   
152.097   Vesting tentative parcel maps
   
152.098   Waiver of parcel map requirements
Other Maps
   
152.110   Reversion to acreage
   
152.111   Resubdivision of an existing subdivision
   
152.112   Merger
   
152.113   Merger and re-subdivision
   
152.114   Merger by request of property owner
Exception
   
152.125   Authority to vary regulations
   
152.126   Planning Commission report
   
152.127   Notice
   
152.128   Fees
Preliminary Soil Report
   
152.140   Purpose
   
152.141   Preliminary soil report
   
152.142   Soil investigation
   
152.143   Approval of soil investigation
Certificates of Compliance
   
152.155   Application
   
152.156   Review
   
152.157   Final map constitutes certificate of compliance
Condominium Conversions
   
152.170   Authority
   
152.171   Findings
   
152.172   Conversion of a mobile home park
   
152.173   Fees
   
152.174   Compensation to tenants
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE; SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to and shall be
considered as supplementing the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the
State of California. This chapter may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance of
the City of Riverbank.
(`67 Code, § 11-1-6)
§ 152.002 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, all terms used in this chapter
which are defined in the Subdivision Map Act are used in this title as so
defined, unless from the context hereof it clearly appears that the different
meaning is intended.
   APPROVED ACCESS. Access to a state highway, county road or city street of
not less than 40 feet in width by a connecting access of not less than 30 feet
in width; the connecting access being owned by the owner of the parcel or
parcels to which it furnishes access or irrevocable easement for the permanent
use of such parcel or parcels.
   ACT or SUBDIVISION MAP ACT. The California Subdivision Map Act, being Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 66410 et seq.
   ARTERIAL. A street that serves a large volume of vehicular traffic with
intersections at grade and direct access to abutting property, and on which
geometric design and traffic-control measures are used to expedite the safe
movement of through traffic.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A document issued by the Riverbank Director of
Planning which certifies that real property has been divided or resulted from a
division in compliance with all applicable city ordinances regulating the
division of real property and Subdivision Map Act applicable at the time the
parcel(s) of real property were divided or resulted from such division.
   COLLECTOR STREET. A street that serves abutting property and carries
residential traffic from local streets to the arterials and highways and
includes:
      (1)   Principal entrance streets to a residential neighborhood.
      (2)   Streets for circulation within a development.
      (3)   Streets adjoining traffic generators:
         (a)   Schools, churches and meeting places.
         (b)   Housing complexes of medium and high density.
         (c)   Neighborhood shopping centers.
   CONTROL OF ACCESS. The condition where the right of owners or occupants of
abutting land or other persons to access, light, air or view in connection with
the street or highway is fully or partially controlled by a public authority.
      (1)   Full control of access means that the authority to control access
is exercised to give preference to through traffic by providing access
connections with selected public roads only and prohibiting crossings at grade
or direct private driveway connections,
      (2)   Partial control of access means that the authority to control
access is exercised to give preference to through traffic to a degree that in
addition to through access connections with selected public roads, there may be
some crossings at grade and some private driveway connections.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A dead-end street with a turn-around at the closed end.
   DESIGN.
      (1)   Street alignments, grades and widths.
      (2)   Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including
alignments and grades thereof.
      (3)   Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way.
      (4)   Fire roads and firebreaks.
      (5)   Lot size and configuration.
      (6)   Traffic access.
      (7)   Grading.
      (8)   Land to be dedicated to park or recreational purposes.
      (9)   Such other specific physical requirements in the plan and
configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure
consistency with or implementation of the general plan.
   DESIGNATED REMAINDER. The portion of any unit or units of improved or
unimproved land that is designated as a remainder by the subdivider and which
is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing. The designated
remainder shall not be counted as a parcel for the purpose of determining
whether a parcel map or final map is required.
      (1)   For a designated remainder parcel, the fulfillment of construction
requirements for improvements shall not be required until a permit or other
grant of approval for development of the remainder parcel is issued by the city
or until the construction of the improvements is required pursuant to an
agreement between the subdivider and the city. In the absence of an agreement,
the city may require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a
reasonable time following approval of the final map and prior to the issuance
of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a remainder
parcel upon a finding by the city that fulfillment of the construction
requirements is necessary for reasons of:
         (a)   The public health and safety; or
         (b)   The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the
orderly development of the surrounding area.
      (2)   A designated remainder may subsequently be sold without any further
requirement of the filing of a parcel map or final map, but a certificate of
compliance or conditional certificate of compliance shall be required.
   DEVELOPMENT. The uses to which the land which is the subject of the map
shall be put, the buildings to be constructed on it and all alterations of the
land and construction incident thereto.
   EXPRESSWAY. A divided street or highway which serves large volumes of
through traffic with full or partial control of access.
   FINAL MAP. A subdivision map creating five or more parcels, except as noted
in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66426(a), (b), (c), and (d), prepared in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and in the Subdivision Map Act, which is
designed to be placed on record in the office of the County Recorder.
   FREEWAY. An expressway with full control of access and with grade crossings
eliminated.
   IMPROVEMENT. Refers to any street work and utilities to be installed, or
agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or
private streets, highways, ways, and easements as are necessary for the general
use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and
drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the
final map thereof. Improvement also refers to any other specific improvements
or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider,
by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity, by the city, or
by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to insure consistency with
or implementation of the general plan.
   LOCAL STREET. A street that serves the local needs of residential properties
in a neighborhood and is so designed to serve not more than 50 dwelling units
between streets or a higher traffic classification.
   LOT. A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by
description as on a final or parcel map or by metes and bounds for the purpose
of sale, lease, financing or separate use.
   MINOR INDUSTRIAL STREET. A street that serves the local needs of industrial
properties and is designed to accommodate truck traffic.
   OWNER. The individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under
this chapter.
   PARCEL MAP. A subdivision map creating four or less parcels or a subdivision
described in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66426 (a), (b), (c), and (d), prepared in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act
which is designed to be placed on record in the office of the County Recorder.
   SHALL, MAY. The word “shall” is mandatory. “May” is permissive.
   SUBDIVIDER. A person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who
proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a
subdivision for himself or for others except that employees and consultants of
such persons or entities acting in such capacity, are not “subdividers”.
   SUBDIVISION. The division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of
improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest
equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the
purpose of sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or future. Property
shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads,
streets, utility easement, or railroad rights-of-way. SUBDIVISION includes a
condominium project, as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 1351(f), a community
apartment project, as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 1351(d), or the conversion
of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in
Cal. Civil Code § 1351(m).
(Cal. Gov't Code § 66424)
   SUBDIVISION MAP ACT. See ACT.
   TENTATIVE MAP. A map made for the purpose of showing the design and
improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around
it and need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the
property.
(Cal. Gov't Code § 66424.5(a))
   TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP. A tentative map of a proposed subdivision into four or
fewer parcels and which meets the requirements of §§
152.090 through
152.098.
   VESTING TENTATIVE MAP. A map which meets the requirements of Cal. Gov't Code
§ 66452(a).
(Cal. Gov't Code § 66424.5(b))
   VESTING TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP. A map which meets all of the requirements of
§§
152.090 through
152.098 and which has printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting
Tentative Parcel Map”.
(`67 Code, § 11-2-1) (Ord. 89-09, passed 11-27-89)
§ 152.003 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted for the purpose of adopting subdivision regulations,
under the authority of and in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code
§§ 66410 et seq., and any future amendment thereto, referred to herein as the
Subdivision Map Act, and in addition to any other regulations provided by law.
(`67 Code, § 11-1-1)
§ 152.004 ADVISORY AGENCY DESIGNATED.
   The Riverbank Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Planning
Commission, is hereby designated as the Advisory Agency for land divisions,
excepting lot line adjustments. The Community Development Director is hereby
designated as the acting authority for lot line adjustments in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. The Advisory Agency is charged with the duty of
making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed
divisions of real property and the imposing of conditions or requirements
thereon. The Planning Commission shall have the power, the authority, and the
duty with respect to tentative maps, final maps, and parcel maps which are
specified in this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 11-1-2) (Am. Ord. 99-01, passed 2-8-99)
§ 152.005 AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL.
   The Council shall have all the authority, powers and duties with respect to
tentative maps, final maps, parcel maps, and the procedure relating thereto,
which are specified by the law and by the provisions of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 11-1-3)
§ 152.006 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-
partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity, as a principal,
agent, or otherwise to;
   (A)   Divide real property in any manner that shall constitute a subdivision
unless and until all the requirements of this chapter have been complied with,
or
   (B)   Sell, lease or divide for purposes of financing or contract, any
division of land that shall constitute a subdivision, unless and until all the
requirements of this chapter have been complied with or unless the offer to
sell, lease or divide is expressly conditioned upon compliance with this
Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act. This shall not be construed to prohibit
the sale of any lot or parcel of land which is of record as a lot or parcel of
land on the effective date of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 11-1-4)
§ 152.007 ACTION BY INTERESTED PERSONS.
   When any provision of the Subdivision Map Act or of this chapter requires
the execution of any certificate or affidavit or the performance of any act by
a person in his official capacity who is also a subdivider or an agent or
employee thereof, such certificate or affidavit shall be executed or such act
shall be performed by some other person duly qualified therefor and designated
so to act by the Council.
(`67 Code, § 11-1-5)
§ 152.008 DENIALS NOT TO BE RESUBMITTED FOR ONE YEAR.
   Any application or request which has been denied wholly or in part by the
Planning Commission or by the City Council shall not be resubmitted for a
period of one year from the date the order of denial became final, except on
grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be valid by the
Planning Commission or the City Council, whichever is the final decision making
body.
(`67 Code, § 11-1-7)
§ 152.009 CATV FACILITIES.
   (A)   For all new mobile home park developments, apartment developments, and
subdivisions contemplating residential use, a mandatory condition of any
approval or permits pertinent thereto shall be the performance of trenching and
backfilling necessary for the provision of cable television service, including
furnishing of any imported backfill material required.
   (B)   The CATV franchisee shall provide plans and specifications and shall
install the facilities required and certify to the city, prior to the final
approval of the subdivision or development, that facilities required herein are
properly installed. The city shall have the right to review and require its
approval of the maps and specifications provided by the CATV franchise.
(`67 Code, § 11-1-8)
§ 152.010 INAPPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall be inapplicable to:
   (A)   The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar
space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings,
mobile home parks, or trailer parks.
   (B)   Mineral, oil, or gas leases.
   (C)   Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under Cal. Health & Safety Code
§§ 8550 et seq.
(Cal. Gov't Code, § 66412)
   (D)   A lot line adjustment between two or more existing adjacent parcels,
where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where
a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created
subject to the following limitations:
      (1)   An application for a lot line adjustment shall be submitted to the
Community Development Department on the application form provided by the city.
A lot line adjustment application shall include the required maps and other
information as identified on the application form provided by the city,
together with any application processing fee as may be established by the City
Council.
      (2)   The Community Development Director in conjunction with the City
Engineer shall be responsible for reviewing a lot line adjustment application.
The Community Deveopment Director shall be responsible for acting on lot line
adjustment applications. Conditions may be imposed upon a lot line adjustment
to ensure conformity with city zoning and building ordinances or to facilitate
the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements. The
decision of the Community Development Director may be appealed to the Planning
Commission as provided for elsewhere in this code.
      (3)   The following finding shall be made at the time of approval of a
lot line adjustment application: “The proposed lot line adjustment, as approved
by the city, is in conformance with the city zoning code and building
ordinances and the Subdivision Map Act.”
      (4)   The Community Development Director may establish administrative
procedures for the review and processing of lot line adjustment applications as
necessary to implement the requirements of this chapter.
      (5)   The lot line adjustment shall be reflected in a deed or record of
survey which shall be recorded. No parcel map shall be required but may be
filed at the owner's discretion.
(`67 Code, § 11-1-9) (Am. Ord. 99-01, passed 2-8-99)
   (E)   Boundary line or exchange agreements to which the State Lands
Commission or a local agency holding a trust grant of tide and submerged lands
is a party.
   (F)   Any separate assessment under Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 2188.7.
   (G)   Unless a parcel or final map was approved by the legislative body of a
local agency, the conversion of a community apartment project, as defined in
Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 11004, to a condominium, as defined in Cal. Civil Code
§ 783, but only if all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   At least 75% of the units in the project were occupied by record
owners of the project on March 31, 1982;
      (2)   A final or parcel map of the project was properly recorded, if the
property was subdivided, as defined in Section 66424, after January 1, 1964,
with all of the conditions of that map remaining in effect after the
conversion;
      (3)   The local agency certifies that the above requirements were
satisfied if the local agency, by ordinance, provides for that certification.
   (H)   Unless a parcel or final map was approved by the legislative body of a
local agency, the conversion of a stock cooperative, as defined in Cal. Bus. &
Prof. Code § 11003.2, to a condominium, as defined in Cal. Civ. Code § 783, but
only if all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   At least 51% of the units in the cooperative were occupied by
stockholders of the cooperative on January 1, 1981, or individually owned by
stockholders of the cooperative on January 1, 1981. As used in this division, a
cooperative unit is INDIVIDUALLY OWNED if and only if the stockholder of that
unit owns or partially owns an interest in no more than one unit in the
cooperative;
      (2)   No more than 25% of the shares of the cooperative were owned by any
one person, as defined in Cal. Gov't Code § 17, including an incorporator or
director of the cooperative, on January 1, 1981;
      (3)   A person renting a unit in a cooperative shall be entitled at the
time of conversion to all tenant rights in state or local law, including but
not limited to rights respecting first refusal, notice, and displacement and
relocation benefits;
      (4)   The local agency certifies that the above requirements were
satisfied if the local agency, by ordinance, provides for that certification;
   (I)   The leasing of or the granting of an easement to a parcel of land, or
any portion or portions thereof, in conjunction with the financing, erection,
and sale or lease of a windpowered electrical generation device on the land, if
the project is subject to discretionary action by the advisory agency or
legislative body.
   (J)   The leasing or licensing of a portion of a parcel, or the granting of
an easement, use permit, or similar right on a portion of a parcel, to a
telephone corporation as defined in Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 234, exclusively for
the placement and operation of cellular radio transmission facilities,
including but not limited to antennae support structures, microwave dishes,
structures to house cellular communi-cations transmission equipment, power
sources, and other equipment incidental to the transmission of cellular
communications, if the project is subject to discretionary action by the
advisory agency or legislative body.
   (K)   Leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. As used in this
division, AGRI-CULTURAL PURPOSES means the cultivation of food or fiber or the
grazing or pasturing of livestock.
(Cal. Gov't Code § 66412)
   (L)   (1)   The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion
thereof, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial
buildings on a single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under
other local agency ordinances regulating design and improvement.
      (2)   The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or
industrial buildings on a single parcel.
(Cal. Gov't Code § 66412.1)
(M)   The construction, financing, or leasing of dwelling units pursuant to
Cal. Gov't Code § 65852.1 or second units pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §
65852.2, but this division shall be applicable to the sale or transfer, but not
leasing, of those units.
(Cal. Gov't Code § 66412.2)
§ 152.011 RELATIONSHIP TO ZONING ORDINANCE.
   This chapter shall not be construed to exempt property from compliance with
Chapter 153 of the city code.
(`67 Code, § 11-1-10) (Ord. 89-09, passed 11-27-89)
§ 152.012 SUBDIVISIONS IN FLOOD HAZARD ZONES.
   Subdivisions located in Flood Hazard Zones as defined in
Chapter 151, §
151.05 shall not be approved until the applicable findings required in
Chapter 153, §
153.382: 200-Year Flood Protection have been made.
(Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
GENERAL DESIGN REGULATIONS
§ 152.025 STANDARDS AND APPROVAL.
   All improvements shall conform to the requirements contained in the Standard
Specifications of the city prepared by the City Engineer, recommended by the
Planning Commission, and adopted by the City Council as the same now exists or
may hereafter be amended. Copies of the Standard Specifications shall be
maintained on file in the offices of the City Clerk, Planning Commission and
City Engineer.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-1)
§ 152.026 STREET DESIGN AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   Street design. Street design shall conform in principle to the streets
shown on the circulation element of the general plan and in width and alignment
to the streets shown on any precise plan adopted by the City Council relating
to streets and shall conform to the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Dedication of land. The subdivider shall be required to dedicate all
land necessary for street purposes as shown on the general plan or any precise
plan or to conform to the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Improvements. Improvements shall be made to conform to the
requirements of the City Council and to the Standard Specifications.
   (D)   Location. The location of a freeway, expressway, arterial or collector
street shall be as shown on the general plan, a precise plan, or as otherwise
designated by the City Council.
   (E)   The street system. In the proposed subdivision, streets shall relate
functionally to the existing streets in the area adjoining the subdivision.
   (F)   The centerlines. The centerlines of all streets wherever practicable
shall be the continuation of the centerline of existing streets, or shall be
offset at least 100 feet.
   (G)   Street intersection. Intersections shall not be at such an angle that
the intersection is dangerous or awkward.
   (H)   Cul-de-sac or dead-end streets. Dead-end streets where necessary to
give access to, or permit a satisfactory future subdivision of adjoining land,
shall extend to the boundary of the property and the resulting dead-end street
may be approved without a turn-around. In all other districts a cul-de-sac or a
comparable area in another form shall be required, separated to the depth of
one lot from the exterior boundary line or other topographical feature of the
subdivision. No dead-end street shall be more than 500 feet in length.
   (I)   Curve radius. The centerline curve radius of all streets and highways
shall conform to accepted engineering standards of design and shall be subject
to the approval of the Engineer but shall not be less than 50 feet.
   (J)   Rounding of intersection corners. At all street intersections the
block corners shall be rounded at the property line with a curve having a
radius of not less than 20 feet. Where street intersections are not at right
angles, greater curve radius may be required.
   (K)   Grades. No streets or highways shall have a grade of more than 6%, or
less than 0.15%, except when approved by the City Engineer.
   (L)   Street names. All street names shall be approved by the City Council.
Duplication of existing names within the county will not be allowed unless the
streets are obviously in alignment with existing streets and likely to sometime
be a continuation of the other street. At least one street in each subdivision
is encouraged to be named after an historically prominent city resident from a
list as approved by the Planning Commission from time to time.
   (M)   Street name signs. Each subdivider shall pay to the city at the time
of approval of the final map as condition of such approval an amount for each
street name sign required in the subdivision.
   (N)   Street improvements. The following street improvements shall be
required on streets which are along and adjacent to the boundary of a
subdivision:
      (1)   Regardless of any other provisions in this division, a street which
is fronting city-owned property shall be constructed by the developer to its
full width including curbs, gutters, sidewalks, storm drainage, and pavement.
Provision shall be made to reimburse the developer for the cost of construction
of any facilities not required by the subdivision.
      (2)   Existing streets with a planned right-of-way width of 60 feet or
less. The street shall be constructed with full street improvements to the
centerline of the existing street. Improvement of the street past the
centerline will only be required when the other driving lane is inadequate to
serve the needs of the proposed subdivision.
      (3)   New streets with a planned right-of-way width of 60 feet or less.
The street shall be constructed to a 40-foot part-width standard to provide for
two driving lanes, one parking lane and curb, gutter and sidewalk adjacent to
the parking lane.
         (a)   Any part-width street so approved shall be at least 40 feet in
width unless the City Council approves a lesser width as set forth in Cal.
Streets & Highways Code § 1805. Such approval for a part-width street of less
than 40 feet shall be based on the following factors:
            1.   The extension of the street is along a property line which
forms the boundary of the subdivision and the necessary width for a 40-foot
part-width street; is not dedicated and the City Council decides not to pursue
dedication; or is not dedicated and the City Council cannot obtain title to the
property within 120 days of approval of the map.
            2.   Adherence to the 40-foot part-width standards would create an
off-set in the center of the subdivision.
            3.   The public interest in having a street without an off-set in
the centerline thereof outweighs the general public policy, set forth above, in
having all part-width streets a minimum of 40 feet in width.
         (b)   In cases in which a part-width street is allowed that is less
than 40 feet in width, on-street parking may be prohibited until such time as a
minimum of 40 feet of the street is improved.
      (4)   New streets with a planned right-of-way width of more than 60 feet.
The street shall be fully constructed from the centerline of the street to the
property being subdivided.
   (O)   Streets and highways. Streets and highways not shown on any other
master street and highway plan or not affected by proceedings initiated by the
Council shall not be of less width than those set forth herein. Increased
widths may be required when streets are to serve commercial property or when
probable traffic conditions warrant such. Approval or determination of the
required width, in the absence of an approved master plan of streets and
highways, shall be made by the City Council.
   (P)   Street widths.
      (1)   Freeways and expressways. Freeways and expressways shall have a
right-of-way as determined by the Governmental Agency.
      (2)   Arterials. Arterials shall have a minimum of right-of-way as
established in the circulation element of the general plan.
      (3)   Collector streets. Collector streets shall have a minimum right-of-
way of 60 feet and a minimum paved width of 40 feet between curb faces.
      (4)   Local streets. Local streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of
50 feet and a minimum paved street width of 36 feet between curb faces.
      (5)   Minor industrial streets. Minor industrial streets shall have a
minimum right-of-way of 60 feet and a minimum paved street width of 50 feet.
      (6)   Cul-de-sac. A cul-de-sac shall have a maximum length of 500 feet
measured from the centerline of the intersecting street to the center of the
turnaround. The radius of the turn-around at the property lines shall be 50
feet. Right-of-way and street width of a cul-de-sac shall conform to that of a
local street.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-2)
§ 152.027 ALLEYS.
   (A)   Alleys shall be prohibited in residential subdivisions except when
approved or required by the City Council for any one of the following reasons:
      (1)   To widen an existing part-width alley which has been dedicated and
approved in an adjacent subdivision;
      (2)   To complete the continuity of existing alleys where the property to
be subdivided is located adjacent to existing blocks containing alleys;
      (3)   The special nature of the design or density of a residential
subdivision where dwellings are to be grouped in such a manner as to require
access from other than street frontage;
      (4)   The relationship to existing or proposed adjacent commercial,
industrial, or high density residential development, or adjacent railroad,
canal rights-of-way or other physical barrier;
      (5)   The unusual size, shape or topographical character of the property
to be subdivided.
   (B)   Alleys shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width.
   (C)   Where two alleys intersect, ten-foot corner cut-offs measured along
the property lines from the point of intersection will be required.
   (D)   Alleys shall be so laid out and aligned as to provide reasonable
access for utilities and other services.
   (E)   Alleys shall be improved in accordance with the requirements of the
Standard Specifications.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-3)
§ 152.028 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Acre or large lot subdivisions. Where a parcel is first subdivided
into large lots of such size that they can be further subdivided and conform to
all requirements of this chapter, the design shall be of such form as to
provide for the future opening of arterials and collector streets and for the
ultimate extension and opening of local streets at such intervals as will
permit a subsequent division of any parcel into smaller lots.
   (B)   Block lengths. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,000 feet unless
existing conditions warrant a variance. Long blocks along arterials and
highways may be required to reduce the number of intersections.
   (C)   Blocks. Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit the platting of
two tiers of lots of normal depth, except where blocks are adjacent to
arterials, freeways, or expressways. Such lots shall be created to back up to
such street and front onto a residential or collector street and access rights
to such arterial, freeway, or expressway shall be waived by the subdivider. The
City Council may grant an exception to these provisions to permit through lots
which are to be developed with uses facing both streets when it is determined
that such exception is warranted by the circumstances of a particular
subdivision and is in compliance with an existing zoning classification.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-4)
§ 152.029 LOTS.
   (A)   Minimum frontage and depth requirements shall be as set forth in
Chapter 153 of this code. Minimum lot frontage shall be measured at the
building setback line.
   (B)   The side lines of all lots shall be at right angles to the street on
which they front, wherever possible.
   (C)   The depth of lots shall not exceed the road frontage by more than
three times.
   (D)   All lots or parcels being created must front with access on a city
street or state highway.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-5)
§ 152.030 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall grant easements for public utility uses along lot
lines where necessary for the extension of any such utility and for the
relocation of existing public utility facilities.
   (B)   Where streets are less than 60 feet in width, additional easements for
planting may be required.
   (C)   Dedication of easements shall be for the purpose of installing
utilities, both privately- and publicly-owned, planting strips and other public
purposes as may be ordered by the City Council.
   (D)   No persons other than a public utility shall erect, construct or place
any building or structure except fences or walls on any public utility
easement. No person shall permit or allow vines or other climbing plant
materials to become attached to public utility poles. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner and/or occupant of real property to maintain any
public utility easement area located thereon in such manner that its condition
will not interfere with the proper operation and maintenance of public utility
facilities located thereon. Any public utility using such easement, its
representatives, agents or employees shall have the right to trim or top such
trees or shrubs growing within or overhanging the easement as may endanger or
interfere with public utility facilities constructed therein and may have free
access to the public utility facilities and every part thereof at all times for
the purpose of constructing, operating and maintaining the public utility
facilities.
   (E)   Easements shall be located and designed in subdivisions to provide for
reasonable, practical and useful placement, replacement, enlargement, repair
and maintenance of utility facilities.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-6)
§ 152.031 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES.
   (A)   All utility distribution facilities and lines including but not
limited to gas, water, sewer, electrical communications, street lighting and
cable television shall be installed underground, except that overhead utility
lines may be permitted when it is determined by the City Council that such
facilities are designed to serve areas larger than that being subdivided and
that it is impractical to locate such facilities underground.
      (1)   When overhead lines are approved by the City Council they shall
extend along alleys, side lot, rear yard, or privately-owned easements,
whichever is possible, except where such overhead lines cross streets, or must
be located outside of easements for good and sufficient reasons as determined
by the City Council.
      (2)   Overhead service to lots abutting existing overhead lines is
permitted where no extension of overhead lines is required.
   (B)   Street lighting standards, underground cables or conduit and
conductors and all materials and appurtenances necessary shall be installed of
a design and at a location approved by the City Engineer and in accordance with
the Standard Specifications.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to insure that
utilities are installed in compliance with the requirements of this section. He
shall make the necessary arrangements with the companies or other agencies for
such installation, according to the specifications of the governing agency. For
the purpose of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment such as but
not limited to, surface mounted switches, transformers, pedestal mounted
terminal boxes and meter cabinets may be placed aboveground.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-7)
§ 152.032 SERVICE ROADS.
   When a subdivision is developed adjacent to a freeway or expressway as shown
on the general plan, the City Council may require the subdivider to dedicate
and improve a frontage road to provide ingress and egress to adjacent lots or
to create backup lots which front upon an interior residential street and back
up to such freeway or expressway. When backup lots are created the subdivider
shall waive direct access rights from the lots to the freeway or expressway and
shall construct a masonry wall, fence or other suitable barrier as required by
the City Council between the subdivision and the adjacent freeway or
expressway.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-8)
§ 152.033 WATERCOURSES.
   The subdivider shall, subject to riparian rights, dedicate a right-of-way
for storm drainage purposes conforming substantially with the lines of any
natural watercourse or channel, stream or creek that traverses the subdivision,
or at the option of the subdivider, provide by dedication, further and
sufficient easements or construction, or both, to dispose of such surface and
storm water.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-9)
§ 152.034 SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   Provisions shall be made for adequate sewage disposal by:
   (A)   Connection to sanitary sewer when available by the installation of a
main lateral to the boundary of the subdivision and service laterals to the
property line of each lot. The design and specifications of sewer construction
shall be consistent with the Standard Specifications.
   (B)   Where septic tanks existed prior to November 1, 1981, or existed on
property annexed to the city subsequent to that date, they may remain until
failure, at which time connection to sanitary sewer shall be required, if
available.
   (C)   Whenever the city, by ordinance, has adopted a sanitary sewer plan for
a particular local sanitary sewer area, pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 66483,
each subdivider filing a final map or parcel map for the division of such area
and the tentative map of which is filed after the effective date of the
addition of this division, shall pay to the city at the time of the filing of
the final map or parcel map, as a condition of approval thereof, such fees as
may be required by the ordinance. The Council may, by resolutions or agreements
adopted or entered into, from time to time, establish conditions under which
such fees may be spread over a period of time.
   (D)   At the time of filing of the final map or parcel map, the subdivider
shall pay to the city such sewer connection fees and front foot assessments as
required by
§ 51.03 of this city code or as required by future amendments approved by
ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-10)
§ 152.035 RESERVATIONS.
   (A)   Requirements. As a condition of approval of a map, the subdivider
shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational
facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the
standards and formula contained in this section.
   (B)   Standards and formula for reservation of land. Where a park,
recreational facility, fire station, library, or other public use is shown on
an adopted specific plan or adopted general plan, the subdivider may be
required by the city to reserve sites as so determined by the city in
accordance with the definite principles and standards contained in the above
specific plan or general plan. The requirements and procedures as outlined in
Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66479 et seq. shall be followed.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-11)
§ 152.036 SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION.
   (A)   Requirement. As a condition of approval of a tentative map or
tentative parcel map, a subdivider who develops or completes the development of
one or more subdivisions within the Riverbank or Sylvan Elementary School
District shall dedicate to the school district such lands as the Council shall
deem to be necessary for the purpose of construction of schools necessary to
assure the residents of the subdivision adequate elementary school service.
   (B)   Procedure. The procedure for dedication and reimbursement shall be as
provided by the Subdivision Map Act.
   (C)   Certificate. The school district to which the property is dedicated
shall record a certificate as required in Cal. Gov't Code § 66478.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-12)
§ 152.037 PARK AND RECREATION DEDICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   Purpose. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by
Cal. Gov't Code § 66477. The park and recreational facilities for which
dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by this section are in
accordance with the recreational element of the general plan of the city, as
revised on January 9, 1987.
   (B)   Requirements. As a condition of approval of a parcel map or tentative
map, the subdivider shall dedicate and develop land, pay a fee in lieu thereof,
or both, at the option of the city for park or recreational purposes at the
time, and according to the standards and formula contained in this section.
      (1)   The subdivider shall without credit:
         (a)   Provide full public improvements, utility expansions and
connections, including but not limited to sidewalks, curbs, gutters, street
paving, traffic control devices, and street trees to land which is dedicated
pursuant to this section;
         (b)   Provide fencing along the property line of that portion of the
subdivision contiguous to the dedicated land;
         (c)   Provide improved drainage through the site; and
         (d)   Provide other improvements which the city determines to be
essential to the acceptance of the land for recreational purposes.
      (2)   Access. All land offered for dedication to local park or
recreational purposes shall have access to at least one existing or proposed
public street that will provide access to the park or recreational facility by
the time that the facility is completed.
   (C)   General standards. It is hereby found and determined that the public
interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that five acres of
property for each 1,000 persons residing within this city be devoted to local
park and recreational purposes. Two and one-half acres shall be allocated for
community parks and two and one-half acres shall be allocated for neighborhood
parks.
   (D)   Standards and formula for dedication of land.
      (1)   Where a park or recreational facility has been designated in the
recreation element of the general plan of the city, and is to be located in
whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and
future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate
land for a local park sufficient in size and topography to serve the residents
of the subdivision. The amount of land to be provided shall be determined
pursuant to the standards and formula listed below. If the amount of land
needed for the park according to the recreational element exceeds the amount of
land to be dedicated according to the formula, the city shall pay compensation
in an amount as determined pursuant to Cal. Code Civ. Proc. §§ 1260.010 et seq.
and §§ 1263.010 et seq. The formula for determining acreage to be dedicated
shall be as follows:
 
Dwelling Type               Zoning District Standard Density Acres/DU
Single-Family dwelling unit R-1             3.5 persons      1 acre/58 DUs
Duplex/Multiple             R-2/R-3         2.5 persons      1 acre/80 DUs
Mobile home dwelling unit
 
      (2)   Dedication of the land shall be made in accordance with the
procedures contained in §
152.036 hereof.
   (E)   Formula for fees in lieu of land dedication.
      (1)   General formula. If there is no park or recreational facility
designated in the city's recreation element to be located in whole or in part
within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the
residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall, in lieu of dedicating land,
pay a fee equal to the value of the land prescribed for dedication in division
(D) thereof and in an amount determined, in accordance with the provisions of
this division (F).
      (2)   Fifty parcels or less. If the proposed subdivision contains 50
parcels or less, the subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the land value of the
portion of the local park required to serve the needs of the residents of the
proposed subdivision as prescribed in division (D) hereof and in an amount
determined in accordance with the provisions of division (F) hereof.
      (3)   Use of money. The money collected hereunder shall be used only for
the purpose of providing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to
serving the subdivision by way of the purchase of necessary land and/or the
improving of such land for park and recreational purposes.
(Ord. 89-09, passed 11-27-89)
      (4)   Sale of dedicated land. If, during the ensuing time between
dedication of land for park purposes and commencement of first-stage
development, circumstances arise which indicate that another site would be more
suitable for local park or recreational purposes serving the subdivision and
the neighborhood (such as receipt of a gift of additional park land or a change
in school location), the land may be sold upon the approval of the City Council
upon review of a recommendation from the Community Development Department and
City Manager, with the resultant funds being used for purchase of a more
suitable site.
   (F)   Amount of fee in lieu of land dedication.
      (1)    Where a fee is required to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the
amount of such fee shall be based upon the fair-market value of the amount of
land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated pursuant to division (D)
hereof. The fair market value of land shall be determined by the city with a
written appraisal prepared and signed by a qualified real estate appraiser
acceptable to the city. The appraisal shall be made immediately prior to the
filing of the final parcel map or tentative subdivision map. If more than one
year elapses between the preparation of the appraisal and the filing of the
final parcel map or tentative subdivision map, the city shall cause a new
appraisal to be prepared. All costs associated with obtaining the appraisal and
the reappraisal, if necessary, shall be borne by the subdivider.
(Ord. 90-05, passed 4-23-90)
      (2)   The city declares its intention that fair market value of land for
the purchase of park land identified as a park site shall be presumed to be
that value which would exist on the property were it not contemplated for
development within the next ten years, rather than appraisals calculated on
lost value based on the anticipated or prospective worth of land potentially or
currently available for urban development.
   (G)   Criteria for requiring both dedication and fee. The subdivider shall
both dedicate land and pay a fee in lieu thereof in accordance with the
following formula:
      (1)   When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed on the
recreational element as the site for a local park, such portion shall be
dedicated for local park purposes and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions
of division (E) hereof shall be paid for any additional land that would have
been required to be dedicated pursuant to division (D) hereof.
      (2)   When a major part of the local park or recreational site has
already been acquired by the city and only a small portion of land is needed
from the subdivision to complete the site, such remaining portion shall be
dedicated and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of division (E) hereof
shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land which would otherwise
have been required to be dedicated pursuant to division (D) hereof, such fees
to be used for the improvement of the existing park and recreational facility
or for the improvement of other local parks and recreational facilities in the
area serving the subdivision.
   (H)   Determination of land or fee. Whether the City Council accepts land
dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a
combination of both, such shall be determined by consideration of the
following:
      (1)   Recreational element of the city's general plan.
      (2)   Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision
available for dedication.
      (3)   Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for
dedication.
      (4)   The feasibility of dedication.
      (5)   Compatibility of dedication with the recreation element.
      (6)   Availability of previously acquired park property.
      (7)   Availability of other, equally suitable sites for park property.
   (I)   Credit for private open spaces, partial credit. Where private open
space for park and recreational purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision
and such space is to be privately-owned and maintained by the future residents
of the subdivision, partial credit, not to exceed 50%, may be given against the
requirements of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof, if the city
finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the following
standards are met:
      (1)   Yards, setbacks, and other open areas required to be maintained by
the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the
computation of such private open space.
      (2)   The private ownership and maintenance of the open space is
adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance, or
restrictions.
      (3)   The use of the private open space is restricted for park and
recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor
of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated
without the consent of the city or its successor.
      (4)   The proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for
park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size,
shape, topography, geology, access, and location.
      (5)   Facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial
accordance with the provisions of the general plan.
      (6)   The open space for which credit is given is a minimum of two acres
and provides some of the local park basic elements listed below:
         (a)   Children's play apparatus area.
         (b)   Landscape park-like and quiet areas.
         (c)   Family picnic area.
         (d)   Game court area.
         (e)   Turf playfield.
   (J)   Procedure. At the time of approval of the tentative parcel map, or
tentative subdivision map, the Planning Commission (or City Council in the case
of a tentative subdivision map) shall determine pursuant to division (D)
hereof, the land to be dedicated and/or fees to be paid by the subdivider. At
the time of the filing of the parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate the
land and/or pay the fees as previously determined by the Commission or Council.
Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities shall be
submitted to the city prior to approval of the final parcel map and shall be
recorded contemporaneously with the final map. In the case of land zoned R-2,
R-3, when the ultimate number of dwelling units is unknown, no park-in-lieu fee
shall be collected at the time of filing the final map. When a building permit
is obtained on the parcel so created for which no park-in-lieu fee has been
collected, the fee shall be computed pursuant to division (D) hereof shall be
collected prior to issuance of the building permit.
   (K)   Commencement of development. At the time of approval of the final
parcel map, the City Council shall specify when development of the park or
recreational facilities shall be commenced. Fees collected shall be committed
within five years after payment of such fees.
   (L)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
subdivisions containing less than five parcels and not used for residential
purposes, provided, however, that if a building permit is requested for
construction of a residential structure or structures, the fees may be required
to be paid by the owner of each such parcel as a condition to the issuance of
such permit. The provisions of this division also shall not apply to commercial
or industrial subdivisions or to condominium projects or stock cooperatives
which consist of the subdivision of air space in an existing apartment building
which is more than five years old, when no new dwelling units are added.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-13) (Am. Ord. 99-06, passed 6-28-99)
§ 152.038 DRAINAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Positive storm drainage facilities shall be installed as deemed
necessary by the City Engineer to provide for the removal of surface water.
Such drainage facilities shall be of a character and design approved by the
City Engineer and in accordance with the requirements of the Standard
Specifications referred to in
§ 152.025 hereof, in order to insure proper grading and erosion control
including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property. Dry
wells shall not be permitted as a drainage facility.
   (B)   Whenever the city, by ordinance, has adopted a drainage plan for a
particular drainage area, pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 66483, each subdivider
filing a final map or parcel map for the division of land, any part of which is
located within the boundaries of such a drainage area and the tentative map of
which is filed after the effective date of the addition of this subsection,
shall pay to the city at the time of the filing of the parcel map, as a
condition of approval thereof, such fees as may be required by the ordinance.
The Council may, by resolutions or agreements adopted or entered into from time
to time, establish conditions under which such fees may be spread over a period
of time.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-14)
§ 152.039 STREET TREES.
   Each subdivider of a subdivision, the tentative map of which is approved by
the Commission after the effective date of this section, shall provide, as part
of the improvements of the subdivision, street trees. An amount equal to the
cost of furnishing, locating, planting and fertilizing street trees and
providing and installing supports for street trees in such subdivision shall be
provided. Street trees shall be planted and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of
Chapter 96 of this code and any pertinent policies adopted by the City Council.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-15)
§ 152.040 RAILROAD CROSSINGS.
   Provisions shall be made for any and all railroad crossings necessary to
provide access to or circulation within the proposed subdivision, including the
preparation of all documents necessary for application to the California State
Public Utilities Commission for the establishment and improvement of such
crossing. The cost of such railroad crossing improvement shall be borne by the
subdivider unless, subsequent to adoption of this ordinance, fees for this
purpose have been imposed and adequate funds have been collected to improve the
crossing.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-16)
§ 152.041 MONUMENTS.
   (A)   At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer shall
set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards described in
Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 8771 so that another engineer or surveyor may readily
retrace the survey.
   (B)   Permanent monuments as required by the Subdivision Map Act and the
Standard Specifications of the city shall be set except where such monuments
already exist in the proper positions.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-17)
§ 152.042 ENERGY CONSERVATION.
   The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map or tentative parcel
map is required shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or
natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision pursuant to Cal.
Gov't Code § 66473.1.
§ 152.043 CENTRALIZED MAIL DELIVERY.
   The subdivider shall confer with local postal authorities to determine
whether cluster mailboxes will be required. If clustering is not required, the
subdivider shall provide a letter from the Postmaster stating the exemption. If
clustering is required, proposed easements or other provisions shall be
included on the tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map. The final
map shall include these provisions as approved. The improvement plans shall
include provision of concrete pads with necessary hardware (at the developers
expense) to allow the post office to attach their mailboxes. The location of
such units shall be approved by the local postal service and the Public Works
Department.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-19)
§ 152.044 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE.
   All water and sewer lot services shall extend two feet past the sidewalk and
shall be between three and five feet of one interior side property line of each
lot in the subdivision.
(`67 Code, § 11-3-20) (Ord. 89-09, passed 11-27-89)
TENTATIVE MAPS FOR SUBDIVISIONS OTHER THAN PARCEL MAPS
§ 152.055 TENTATIVE MAPS REQUIRED.
   (A)   A tentative map and final map shall be required for all subdivisions
creating five or more parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Cal.
Civil Code § 783, a community apartment project containing five or more
parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing
five or more dwelling units, except where:
      (1)   The land before division contains less than five acres; each parcel
created by the division abuts upon a city-maintained street, road, or highway
and no dedications or improvements are required by the City Council;
      (2)   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of 20 acres or
more and has an approved access to a city-maintained street, road or highway;
      (3)   The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved
access to a city-maintained street, road or highway, which comprises part of a
tract of land zoned for industrial development, and which has the approval of
the governing body as to street alignments and widths;
      (4)   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less
than 40 acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section.
   (B)   A parcel map shall be required for those subdivisions described in
this section.
(`67 Code, § 11-4-1)
§ 152.056 FILING; DEPARTMENTAL APPROVAL.
   (A)   Copies of any requested tentative map and statement of the proposed
subdivision of any land shall be filed with the Planning Commission at least
six weeks (or such longer period as determined by the Community Development
Director) prior to the regularly scheduled meeting at which considera-tion is
desired. A filing fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council shall be
paid at the time of filing.
   (B)   The secretary of the Planning Commission shall examine the map upon
presentation and shall not accept such map unless the same is in full
compliance with the law and the provisions of this chapter as to form, data,
information, and other matters required to be shown thereon or furnished
therewith. Maps shall be accepted which are not in full compliance if
applications are concurrently submitted that would assure compliance. The map
shall not be accepted as complete until the map is in full compliance. The
exact requirements for submittal of a tentative map shall be available, in
writing, to a subdivider at least 30 days prior to the deadline for submittal.
   (C)   The secretary of the Planning Commission shall transmit copies of such
tentative map to interested and affected agencies. A copy shall be transmitted
to each school district having jurisdiction over the area shown on the
tentative map.
   (D)   The department or agency receiving a copy of the map may notify,
within 15 days of receipt thereof, the secretary of the Planning Commission of
particulars which do not conform to requirements coming within its authorized
scope. In the case of school districts, they shall respond within 20 working
days of the date on which the notice was mailed. If a reply is not received
within the time periods listed above, it will be assumed that the agency
approved its form.
   (E)   Prior to the presentation of a formal tentative map, the subdivider is
encouraged to present sketches of his proposal to the Planning Department.
However, such a preliminary sketch is not to be construed as a tentative map.
Where only a portion of a larger area is to be subdivided at this time and the
balance planned for future subdivision, the Commission may require a map
showing the proposed street layout within the entire area. Such a map is not a
tentative map but is to be used as a guide for the tentative map under
consideration and future maps of that area.
   (F)   Upon submittal of a tentative map of unincorporated territory, no
further action may be taken and the map may not be accepted as complete (at the
discretion of the City Council) until the territory has been annexed to the
city.
(`67 Code, § 11-4-2)
§ 152.057 FORM OF TENTATIVE MAP.
   The form of the tentative map shall be as determined from time to time by
the Planning Department and shall be available, in writing, to the subdivider
at least 30 days prior to the final date for submittal of the map.
(`67 Code, § 11-4-3)
§ 152.058 STATEMENT IN WRITING.
   A statement shall be presented by the subdivider in writing accompanying the
map stating:
   (A)   Proposed use of property. If more than one use, the area, lots or lot
proposed for each type of use shall be shown on the tentative map.
   (B)   Statement of the improvements and public utilities proposed to be
installed.
   (C)   Proposed plan for drainage.
   (D)   Proposed plan for sewerage and sewage disposal.
   (E)   Provisions for water supply, both domestic and fire protection.
Provisions for fire protection shall be approved by the Fire Department
District.
   (F)   Type of location of street lighting proposed.
   (G)   A copy of any existing or proposed restrictive easements and public
areas.
   (H)   Justification and reasons for any exceptions to provisions of this
chapter or for any amendment to the zoning law, which may be requested in
conjunction with the subdivision proposed.
(`67 Code, § 11-4-4)
§ 152.059 ACTION ON TENTATIVE MAP.
   (A)   Public hearings.
      (1)   Whenever a tentative map is submitted to the Planning Commission
for review, the Planning Commission shall give notice of the hearing not less
than ten days before the date of the hearing in the following manner:
         (a)   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city; and
         (b)   By mailing the notice to the owners of all real property within
300 feet of the property which is the subject of the application.
      (2)   If the proposed subdivision is a conversion of residential real
property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock
cooperative project, the notice shall also be given by mail to each tenant of
the subject property and shall also include notification of the tenant's right
to appear and be heard.
   (B)   Time limits.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall review and make a written report on
the tentative map within 50 days after it has been accepted for filing by the
secretary of the Planning Commission.
      (2)   At the next regular meeting of the City Council following filing of
the Planning Commission report with it, the City Council shall fix the meeting
date at which the tentative map will be considered by it, which date shall be
within 30 days thereafter and the City Council shall approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove the tentative map within such, 30-day period. If no
action is taken on the tentative map within the above time limits, or any
authorized extension thereof, the tentative map as filed, shall be deemed to be
approved, insofar as it complies with other applicable requirements of this
chapter.
      (3)   The time limit for acting and reporting on tentative maps as
specified in this section may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider
and the City Council.
   (C)   Notices to subdivider. Any report or recommendation on a tentative map
by the staff or Planning Commission shall be served on the subdivider and on
each tenant of the subject property, in the case of a proposed conversion of
residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment
project, or stock cooperative project, at least three days prior to the hearing
on such map by the Planning Commission or City Council. Such required
submission in writing shall be deemed complied with when such reports or
recommendations are placed in the mail bearing proper postage, and directed to
the subdivider at his address shown on the map or at other address as requested
in writing.
   (D)   Findings. A tentative map shall not be approved or conditionally
approved by the City Council unless the City Council finds that the proposed
subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvements, is
consistent with the general plan and applicable specific plans of the city.
      (1)   In connection with their review of a tentative map, the City
Council shall determine whether the discharge of waste from the proposed
subdivision into the existing sewer system would result in violation of
existing requirements prescribed.
      (2)   The City Council shall consider the effect of its actions on the
housing needs of the region in which the local jurisdiction is situated and
balance those needs against the public service needs of the city's residents
and available fiscal and environmental resources.
      (3)   A tentative map shall not be approved or conditionally approved by
the City Council if it makes any of the following findings:
         (a)   The proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and
specific plans.
         (b)   That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is
not consistent with applicable general and specific plans.
         (c)   That the site is not physically suitable for the type of
development.
         (d)   That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed
density of the development.
         (e)   That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements
are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and
avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.
         (f)   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements
is likely to cause serious public health problems.
         (g)   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements
will conflict with easements acquired by the public at large for access
through, or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this
connection, the City Council may approve a map if it finds that alternate
easements for access or for use will be provided, and that these will be
substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This
division shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by
judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   Public access to the Stanislaus River. No approval shall be granted
for a tentative map of any proposed subdivision to be fronted upon the
Stanislaus River which does not provide for a dedication of a public easement
along a portion of the bank of the river bordering or lying within the proposed
subdivision. Reasonable public access from a public highway to the Stanislaus
River shall also be provided. These easements shall comply with the provisions
of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66478.1 et seq. and may be satisfied by using the
existing United States Corps of Engineers easement.
   (F)   Subdivider to indemnify city. If any controversy exists regarding the
approval of a tentative map, the tentative map shall include a condition that
the subdivider defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its agents,
officers, and employees from any claim, action, or proceeding against the city
or its agents, officers, or employees to attack, set aside, void, or annul an
approval of the City Council concerning the subdivision, provided that the
action is brought within the time period provided for in Cal. Gov't Code §
66499.37.
(`67 Code, § 11-4-5)
§ 152.060 VESTING TENTATIVE MAP.
   Whenever a tentative map for residential development is required under this
chapter, a vesting tentative map may be filed instead. At the time such a map
is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words, “Vesting
Tentative Map.”
   (A)   In addition to submitting all of the information normally required for
a tentative map, the following information shall also be required with
submittal of a vesting tentative map.
      (1)   Grading plans, including relationship to grades of neighboring
properties.
      (2)   Typical height, size, and location of buildings.
      (3)   Sewer, water, storm drain and road details.
      (4)   Information on the use to which the buildings will be put.
   (B)   Except as otherwise specified in this section, a vesting tentative map
shall be processed in the same manner as a tentative map.
   (C)   A vesting tentative map may be conditioned or denied if any of the
findings listed in §
152.059(D) can be made or if it is determined that:
      (1)   Failure to condition or deny the map would place the residents of
the subdivision or of the immediate community, or both, in a condition
dangerous to their health or safety, or both; and/or
      (2)   The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state
or federal law.
   (D)   When a vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved,
that approval shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in
substantial compliance with Cal. Gov't Code § 66474.2 or if that section is
repealed, with all the ordinances, policies, and standards of the city in
effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally
approved.
   (E)   Approval of a vesting tentative map shall be for the same period as
described in §
152.070 of this chapter. The rights conferred by this section shall expire if a
final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map.
If the final map is approved, the rights conferred by this section shall be
subject to the periods of time set forth below.
(Ord. 89-09, passed 11-27-89)
      (1)   The rights conferred by a vesting tentative map shall last for an
initial period of two years beyond the recording date of the final map. Where
several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a
single vesting tentative map, the two-year initial time period shall begin for
each phase when the final map for the phase is recorded.
(Ord. 93-07, passed 11-22-93)
      (2)   The initial time period shall be automatically extended by any time
used by the city for processing a complete application for a grading permit or
for design or architectural review, if the time used exceeds 30 days from the
date that a complete application is filed.
      (3)   At any time prior to the expiration of the initial time period
provided by this section, the subdivider may apply for a one year extension. If
the Planning Commission denies the extension, the subdivider may appeal that
denial to the City Council within 15 days.
      (4)   If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building
permit during the initial time period, or any approved extension thereof, the
rights conferred by a vesting tentative map shall continue until the expiration
of that permit, or any extension of that permit granted by the city.
   (F)   Any time prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map, the
subdivider may apply for an amendment to the vesting tentative map. A request
for amendment shall include review of the entire map under the ordinance,
policies and standards in effect at the time of the requested amendment.
(Ord. 89-09, passed 11-27-89)
(`67 Code, § 11-4-6)
FINAL MAPS
§ 152.070 FILING; TIME LIMIT.
   (A)   Expiration.
      (1)   Final maps of subdivisions of more than four parcels shall be filed
for record within 24 months after approval or conditional approval of the
tentative map. Delivery of a complete and correct map to the City Engineer
shall be deemed a timely filing for purposes of this section.
      (2)   Upon written application of the subdivider filed prior to the
expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map, the
Planning Commission may extend the time for filing a final map for a period or
periods not exceeding an additional three years if it determines that
conditions affecting the subdivision have not substantially changed. Such a
request shall automatically extend the map for 60 days or until the application
for extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied, in any case where
a final map has not been filed within 24 months or such extended period of time
as may be granted by the Planning Commission, approval of a new tentative map
shall be required.
   (B)   Multiple final maps.
      (1)   Multiple final maps of portions of an approved tentative map may be
filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if: the subdivider, at the
time the tentative map is filed, informs the city of the subdivider's intention
to file multiple final maps on such tentative map, or after filing of the
tentative map, the city and the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple
final maps.
      (2)   If the subdivider is subject to a requirement of $100,000 or more
to construct, improve, or finance the construction or improvement of public
improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, the filing of each
multiple map as authorized by Cal. Gov't Code § 66456.1 shall extend the
expiration of the tentative map by 36 months from the date of expiration or the
date of the filing of the final map, whichever is later. There shall not be
more than two such final maps (and automatic extensions) and the extensions
shall not extend the tentative map more than ten years from its approval or
conditional approval.
(`67 Code, § 11-5-1)
§ 152.071 FEES.
   A tracing of the final map shall be filed with the City Clerk. The
subdivider shall provide the city with the County Recorder's fee for recording
the final map and shall pay to the city fees for checking the map and for
preparing prints thereof, the amount of such fees to be set from time to time
by resolution of the City Council.
(`67 Code, § 11-5-2)
§ 152.072 FORM OF FINAL MAP.
   (A)   The final map shall be clearly drawn, printed or reproduced by a
process guaranteeing a permanent record as approved by the County Recorder. The
map shall be so made and shall be in such condition when filed that good
legible prints and negatives can be made therefrom.
   (B)   The final map shall contain a chapter consisting of the name of tract
and subchapter or general description of all the property being subdivided with
reference to maps which have been previously recorded. In no case shall the
chapter be the same, or so nearly the same as to cause confusion as a name of
any existing city, town, tract or subdivision of land of which a map has been
previously recorded.
   (C)   Sufficient data must be shown to determine readily the bearing and
length of every lot line, block line and boundary line. Dimensions of lots
shall be given as total dimensions, corner to corner, and shall be shown in
feet and hundredths of a foot. Lots containing one acre or more shall show
total acreage to nearest hundredth, bearing and lengths of straight lines, and
radii and arc length for all curves as may be necessary to determine the
location of the centers of curves and tangent points shall be shown.
Calculations of all nonrectangular lots shall be provided by the subdivider to
ensure that city codes are met.
   (D)   The final map shall show clearly any stakes, monuments or other
evidence found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the tract. The
corners of adjoining subdivisions or portion thereof shall be identified by lot
and block numbers, subdivision name and properties shown.
      (1)   Whenever the City Engineer has established the center line of a
street or alley, adjacent to or in the proposed subdivision, the data shall be
shown in the final map indicating all monuments found and making reference to a
field book or map. If the point were reset by ties, the course and detail or
relocation data used shall be stated.
      (2)   The map shall show the location and description of all monuments
and bench marks found or placed in making the survey of the subdivision with
property reference sufficient to relocate.
   (E)   In addition, the final map shall be prepared in full compliance with
the following requirements:
      (1)   Boundary of subdivision. The boundary of the subdivision shall be
designated by a blue border one-eighth inch in width applied to the reverse
side of the tracings. Such border shall not interfere with the legibility of
figures or other data. If the map includes a “designated remainder” parcel, and
the gross area of the “designated remainder” parcel or similar parcel is five
acres or more, that remainder parcel need not be shown on the map and its
location need not be indicated as a matter of survey, but only by deed
reference to the existing boundaries of the remainder parcel.
      (2)   Right-of-way dimensions. The center lines and side lines of all
streets, the total width of all streets, the widths of each side of the center
line, the widths of any portion of a street being dedicated, and the widths of
existing dedications and the widths of all railroad, irrigation district or
other rights-of-way shall be shown.
      (3)   Easements. The map shall show the side lines of all easements to
which the lots are subject. Such easements must be clearly labeled and
identified and if already of record, the record references given. If any
easement is not definitely located, a statement of such easement must appear on
the chapter sheet. Easements for storm drains, sewers and other purposes shall
be demoted by fine broken lines. The width of the easement and the lengths and
bearings of the lines thereof and sufficient ties thereto to definitely locate
the easement with respect to the subdivision must be shown. If the easement is
being dedicated by the map, it shall be properly referenced in the owner's
certificate of dedication.
      (4)   Acreage. The total acreage of the subdivision to the nearest one-
hundredth of an acre shall be shown on the face of the final map.
      (5)   Lot numbers. Lot numbers shall be consecutive with no omissions or
duplications.
      (6)   Other data. The map shall also show all other data that is or may
be required by law.
      (7)   Disposition of lots. The final map shall particularly define,
delineate and designate all lots intended for sale or reserved for private
purposes, all parcels offered for dedication for any purpose, public or private
with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every
case.
      (8)   Reversion to acreage. Maps filed for the purpose of reverting
subdivided land to acreage shall be conspicuously so designated under the
chapter “The Purpose of This Map is a Reversion to Acreage.”
   (F)   The following additional information shall be required on a separate
document or additional map sheet and shall indicate its relationship to the
final map. The document or map shall contain a statement that the additional
information is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date
of filing, and that it is not intended to affect record chapter interest.
      (1)   Building lines. Building setback lines shall be indicated by dashed
lines of the same width as the lines denoting street boundaries and shall be
properly designated.
      (2)   High water line. The line of high water shall be shown in any case
where the subdivision is adjacent to a stream, channel or any body of water.
      (3)   Flood areas. The boundaries of any areas within the proposed
subdivision which are subject to inundation by water shall be shown.
   (G)   (1)   The subdivider shall furnish improvement plans which include the
following information to the City Engineer, and shall receive his authorization
prior to construction of any of the improvements.
         (a)   Typical cross sections and proposed final finished grades of all
roads, streets and highways in the proposed new subdivision, together with a
profile showing the relation between finished grade and existing ground
elevations.
         (b)   Proposed lengths, size and type of any pipes, culverts or
structures necessary for drainage, erosion control or the public safety with
plans and specifications therefor.
         (c)   Any information required by the conditional approval of the City
Council.
         (d)   Elevations shall be referenced to the U.S.G.S. Datum.
      (2)   An improvement plan shall be acted on within 60 working days of its
submittal, except that at least 15 working days shall be provided for
processing any resubmitted improvement plan and this period shall not include
any days during which the improvement plan has been returned to the applicant
for correction, or has been subject to review by other than the city.
   (H)   At the time of the filing of the final map with the City Engineer, the
subdivider shall also file therewith traverse sheets showing traverse closures
and the computation of all distances, angles, and courses shown on the final
map. The traverse of the boundaries of the tract and of lots and blocks shall
close within a limit of error of one in 10,000.
   (I)   The final map shall be accompanied by a report prepared by a duly
authorized chapter company naming the persons whose consent is necessary to the
preparation and recordation of the map and to the dedication of the streets,
alleys and other public places shown on the map and certifying that as of the
date of the preparation of the report, the persons therein named are all the
persons necessary to give clear chapter to the subdivision. At the time of
recording the approved map, there shall be filed with the County Recorder, a
guarantee executed by a duly authorized chapter company for the benefit and
protection of the city showing that persons (naming them) consenting to the
preparation and recordation of the map and offering for dedication the streets,
alleys and other public places shown thereon are all the persons necessary to
pass clear chapter to the subdivision and to the dedications shown thereon.
   (J)   Prior to the submission of the final map, the subdivider shall comply
with
§§ 152.140 through
152.143.
   (K)   Prior to the recordation of a subdivision map which will result in the
division of any existing building or buildings into separate units or parts,
the subdivider shall secure certification by the Chief Building Official that
any building or buildings to be divided will, after division meet current code
standards for new construction. As used in this section, the phrases “current
code standards” refers to all standards in the current adopted editions of the
Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code and Fire Code
for the city.
(`67 Code, § 11-5-3)
§ 152.073 CERTIFICATES.
   The following certificates, statements or acknowledgements, as well as any
others required by law, shall appear on the final map. Such certificates may be
combined where appropriate and may be made by separate instrument to be
recorded concurrently with the final map.
   (A)   Statement of parties holding title. A statement signed and
acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the land
subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the map as
required by Cal. Gov't Code § 66436.
   (B)   Dedication statement. A statement signed and acknowledged as above
offering for dedication all parcels of land shown on the final map and intended
for any public use, except those parcels other than streets which are intended
for the exclusive use of the lot owners in the subdivision, their licenses,
visitors, tenants and servants.
   (C)   Engineer's certificate. A statement of the civil engineer or licensed
surveyor responsible for the survey and final map. The statement shall give the
date of the survey, state that the survey and final map were made by him or
under his or her direction and that the survey is true and complete as shown.
The statement shall also state that all the monuments are of the character and
occupy the positions indicated, or that they will be set in those such
positions on or before a specified later date. The statement shall also state
that the monuments are, or will be, sufficient to enable the survey to be
retraced. The signature of such civil engineer or surveyor, unless accompanied
by his seal, must be attested.
   (D)   City Engineer's statement. A statement signed by the City Engineer
shall be provided within 20 days from the time the final map is submitted to
him by the subdivider for approval in accordance with Cal. Gov't Code § 66442.
   (E)   Certificates for execution. A certificate for execution shall be
provided for the City Clerk, the secretary of the Planning Commission, and the
County Recorder, as appropriate.
   (F)   Certificates regarding tax liens. Prior to the filing of the final map
with the governing body, the subdivider shall file with the clerk of the Board
of Supervisors of Stanislaus County, certificates as required by Cal. Gov't
Code §§ 66492 et seq.
(`67 Code, § 11-5-4)
§ 152.074 ACTION ON FINAL MAP.
   (A)   Approval by Planning Commission. The Community Development Director or
secretary of the Planning Commission, upon receiving the final map from the
subdivider or his agent, shall examine the same to determine whether the map
conforms with the tentative map and with all requirements imposed as a
condition to the acceptance of the tentative map by the City Council. If it is
determined that the final map does not conform, the subdivider shall be advised
of the changes or additions that must be made before the final map can be
certified by the Community Development Director or the secretary of the
Planning Commission. If the subdivider is not satisfied with the determination
made by the Community Development Director or the secretary of the Planning
Commission, he may appeal in writing, within 15 days, to the Planning
Commission. If it is determined that the map is in conformity, the Community
Development Director or secretary of the Planning Commission shall certify
approval thereon.
   (B)   Approval by City Engineer. Upon approval by the Community Development
Director or the secretary of the Planning Commission, the final map and other
data shall be submitted to the City Engineer, who shall examine and determine
that the subdivision as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the
tentative map, and any approved alterations thereof, that all provisions of the
law and of this chapter applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map
have been complied with, and that he is satisfied that the map is technically
correct. If the City Engineer determines that full conformity therewith has
been made, he shall so certify on the map.
   (C)   Approval by City Council.
      (1)   At its first regular meeting following the transmittal of the final
map to the City Clerk, the Council shall receive the map and shall consider the
map and the offers of dedication. The Council may reject any or all offers of
dedication. In the event that all improvements required or conditions imposed
upon the terms of this chapter or by law are not completed before the filing of
the final map, the Council may enter into an agreement with the subdivider for
posting improvement securities as provided in
§§ 152.075 and
152.076 of this chapter. In such case, when the agreement has been approved by
the City Attorney as to form and by the City Engineer as to sufficiency, and
when the improvement security has been approved by the City Attorney as to form
and by the City Manager as to sufficiency, the Council may consider the final
map.
      (2)   The City Council shall, at the meeting at which it receives the map
or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map,
approve the map if it is determined to be in conformity with the provisions of
law and of this chapter. The Council shall disapprove the map if it is
determined not to be in conformity with the provisions of law and of this
chapter and shall advise the subdivider of its disapproval, and the reason or
reasons therefor.
      (3)   Failure to construct off-site improvements (not within the
boundaries of the subdivision) that are on land in which neither the subdivider
nor the city has sufficient chapter or interest to permit the improvements to
be made cannot be grounds to refuse or postpone approval of a final map. The
provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 66462.5 shall govern.
   (D)   Action by City Clerk. The City Clerk, upon receipt of the necessary
fees, and after the signatures and seals have been affixed and upon the
approval of the final map by the Council, shall transmit the map to the County
Recorder who shall file the same. No map shall have any force of effect until
the same has been approved by the Council, and no title to any property
described in any offer of dedication shall pass until recordation of the final
map.
(`67 Code, § 11-5-5)
§ 152.075 SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT.
   (A)   If the improvements required as a condition of the final map are not
complete and accepted by the city prior to approval by the Council of the final
map, the subdivider shall execute and file an agreement between himself and the
city, specifying the period within which he shall complete all improvement work
to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, and providing that if he shall fail
to complete such work within such period, the city may complete the same and
recover the full cost and expense thereof from the subdivider. The agreement
shall also provide for inspection of all improvements by the City Engineer and
reimbursement of the city by the subdivider for the cost of such inspection.
   (B)   The fees shall be 3% of the estimated cost of improvements or such
other amount as may be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Such agreement may also provide:
      (1)   For the construction of the improvements in units.
      (2)   For extension of time under conditions therein specified.
      (3)   For partial release of the improvement securities upon acceptance
by the City Council of the work as it progresses.
      (4)   For the financing and construction of any or all of such
improvements under an appropriate special assessment act proceeding, the
subdivider shall agree, in writing, to initiate, and so far as may be in his
power, to consummate such proceedings within such time as may be prescribed by
the Council.
      (5)   For payment of a deposit in such amount as is set from time to time
by resolution of the City Council to ensure adequate dust control measures.
(`67 Code, § 11-5-6)
§ 152.076 IMPROVEMENT SECURITY.
   (A)   Improvement security.
      (1)   The subdivider shall also file with the aforesaid agreement, two
improvement securities, each to be in an amount based upon the total estimated
cost of the improvements as determined by the City Engineer. One improvement
security shall secure faithful performance of the agreement and shall be in an
amount equal to 100% of the estimated cost of the improvement. The second
improvement security shall secure the obligations set forth in Cal. Gov't Code
§ 66499.3(b), for payment of the contractor, his subcontractors and to persons
renting equipment or furnishing labor or materials to them for the
improvements, and shall be in an amount equal to 50% of the total estimated
cost of the improvements. Such improvement securities shall be in one of the
following forms:
         (a)   A cash deposit or deposits.
         (b)   A bond or bonds issued by one or more duly authorized corporate
sureties.
         (c)   A savings and loan certificate and/or share.
         (d)   An instrument or instruments of credit from an agency of the
state, federal, or local government when any such agency provides at least 20%
of the financing for the portion of the act or agreement requiring security, or
from one or more financial institutions subject to regulations by the state or
federal government pledging that the funds necessary to meet the performance
are on deposit and guaranteed for payments and agreeing that the funds
designated by the instrument shall become trust funds for the purposes set
forth in the instrument.
         (e)   Any other form of improvement security authorized by the
Subdivision Map Act, including the deposit, with a responsible escrow agent or
trust company approved by the Council, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind
approved for security deposits of public money.
      (2)   The required security shall be in an amount determined by the City
Engineer as sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements, engineering,
inspection, fees and incidental expenses. The required improvements security
shall be approved by the City Engineer as to sufficiency and by the City
Attorney as to form.
   (B)   Forfeiture of improvement security. In the event the subdivider shall
fail to complete all improvement work in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and the city shall have to complete same, or if the subdivider shall
fail to reimburse the city for the cost of inspection, engineering, fees and
incidental expense, the city shall call on the surety for reimbursement, or
shall appropriate from any cash deposits, savings and loan certificates and
shares, or instruments of credit, funds for reimbursement. In any case, if the
amount of the surety bond, savings and loan certificate and shares, instrument
of credit, or cash deposit shall exceed all cost and expenses incurred by the
city, it shall release the remainder of such bond, savings and loan certificate
or share of cash deposit. If the amount of the surety bond, savings and loan
certificate and share, instrument of credit, or cash deposit shall be less than
the cost and expense incurred by the city, the subdivider shall be liable to
the city for such difference.
   (C)   Release of improvement security. Improvement securities may be
released or reduced, in whole or in part, only in the time and manner
prescribed in Cal. Gov't Code § 66499.7, as it now exists or is hereafter
amended, and only after certification by the City Engineer that the work
covered thereby has been satisfactorily completed and upon approval of the
Council.
   (D)   Guarantee and warranty security. In addition to the improvement
securities specified in division (A) of this section, the subdivider shall file
with the subdivision agreement an amount as specified in the agreement to
guarantee and warrant subdivision improvements for a period of one year
following the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or
labor done, or defective materials furnished. The City Engineer is authorized
to release the security upon expiration of the guarantee and warranty period if
it is determined that subdivision improvements so guaranteed and warranted are
satisfactory.
(`67 Code, § 11-5-7)
Statutory reference:
   Improvement security, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66499 et seq.
§ 152.077 CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF MAPS.
   After a final map is filed in the office of the County Recorder, it may be
amended as provided in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66469 et seq.
(`67 Code, § 11-5-8) (Ord. 89-09, passed 11-27-89)
PARCEL MAPS
§ 152.090 PARCEL MAPS REQUIRED.
   When a proposed division of land will result in real property being divided
into four or fewer parcels (or more than four parcels, but nevertheless not a
subdivision as defined in the Subdivision Map Act), a parcel map shall be
prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 11-6-1)
§ 152.091 TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP FILING; DEPARTMENTAL APPROVAL.
   (A)   Copies of any requested tentative parcel map shall be filed with the
Planning Commission at least four weeks (or such longer period as determined by
the Community Development Director) prior to the regularly scheduled meeting at
which consideration is desired. A filing fee as set forth by resolution of the
City Council shall be paid at the time of filing.
   (B)   The secretary of the Planning Commission shall examine the map upon
presentation and shall not accept such map unless the same is in full
compliance with the law and the provisions of this chapter as to form, data,
information and other matters required to be shown thereon or furnished
therewith. Maps shall be accepted which are not in full compliance if
applications are concurrently submitted that would assure compliance. The map
shall not be accepted as complete until the map is in full compliance. The
exact requirements for submittal of a tentative parcel map shall be available,
in writing, to a subdivider at least 30 days prior to the deadline for
submittal.
   (C)   The secretary of the Planning Commission shall transmit copies of such
tentative map to interested and affected agencies.
(`67 Code, § 11-6-2)
§ 152.092 FORM OF TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP.
   The form of the tentative parcel map shall be as determined from time to
time by the Planning Department and shall be available, in writing, to the
subdivider at least 30 days prior to the final date for submittal of the map.
(`67 Code, § 11-6-3)
§ 152.093 ACTION ON TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP.
   (A)   Public hearings. Whenever a tentative parcel map is submitted to the
Planning Commission for review, the Planning Commission shall give notice of
the hearing not less than ten days before the date of the hearing in the
following manner:
      (1)   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city,
and
      (2)   By mailing the notice to the owners of all real property within 300
feet of the property which is the subject of the application.
   (B)   Approval by Planning Commission. If the tentative map complies with
all of the requirements of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act, the
Commission may approve the division, subject to the dedication of necessary
right-of-way for streets and easements, the installation of all improvements
along the frontages of the property so divided, as required by the Commission,
and the installation of all necessary utilities and connections to each lot.
All lot sizes shall conform to the provisions of the Zoning Regulations of the
city.
   (C)   Limitations on approval. A tentative parcel map shall not be approved
or conditionally approved by the Planning Commission if it makes any of the
following findings:
      (1)   The proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and
specific plans.
      (2)   The design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not
consistent with applicable general and specific plans.
      (3)   The site is not physically suitable for the proposed type of
development.
      (4)   The site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of the
development.
      (5)   The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are
likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably
injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.
      (6)   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely
to cause serious public health problems.
      (7)   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
conflict with easements acquired by the public at large for access through, or
use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the
Commission may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for access
or for use, will be provided and that these will be substantially equivalent to
ones previously acquired by the public. This division shall apply only to
easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   Protest. The subdivider, any tenant of the subject property, or any
interested person adversely affected by a decision of the Planning Commission
may file a written protest within ten days after the Planning Commission
action. Upon filing of an appeal, the City Council will hold a public hearing
and render its decision within 30 days of the filing of the appeal.
   (E)   Subdivider to indemnify city. If any controversy exists regarding the
approval of a tentative parcel map, the tentative parcel map shall include a
condition that the subdivider defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and
its agents, officers, and employees from any claim, action, or proceeding
against the city or its agents, officers, or employees to attack, set aside,
void, or annul, an approval of the City Council concerning the map, provided
that the action is brought within the time period provided for in Cal. Gov't
Code § 66499.37.
(`67 Code, § 11-6-4)
§ 152.094 FILING; TIME LIMIT.
   (A)   Filing. The subdivider or his agent may file a parcel map with the
City Engineer for his examination, certification, and recordation within 24
months after the approval or conditional approval of the tentative parcel map.
Delivery of a complete and correct map to the City Engineer shall be deemed a
timely filing for purposes of this section.
      (1)   Upon application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration of
the approved or conditionally approved tentative map, the Commission may extend
the time for filing a parcel map for a period or periods not exceeding an
additional three years if it determines that conditions affecting the parcel
map have not substantially changed. Such request for an extension automatically
extends the expiration date of the map by 60 days or until the application for
the extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied, whichever comes
first.
      (2)   In any case where a parcel map has not been recorded within 24
months or such extended period of time as may be granted by the Planning
Commission, approval of a new tentative parcel map shall be required. A parcel
map shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, a registered civil
engineer or licensed land surveyor and shall substantially conform to the
tentative parcel map and conditions thereto as approved by the Planning
Commission.
   (B)   Fees. A tracing of the parcel map shall be filed with the City
Engineer. In addition, the subdivider shall deposit with the city the
recorder's fee for recording the parcel map and fees for checking the map, the
amount of such fees to be set from time to time by resolution of the Council.
   (C)   Form of parcel map. The parcel map shall conform to the provisions of
§ 152.072 of this chapter for final maps where applicable. The map shall show
the definite location of the parcel or parcels and particularly their relation
to surrounding surveys. The location of any remainder of the original parcel
shall be shown, but need not be shown as a matter of survey, but only by
reference to the existing record boundaries if such remainder has a gross area
of five acres or more. The parcel map may be compiled from record data when
sufficient survey information exists on filed maps to locate and retrace the
exterior boundary lines of the parcel map and when the location of at least one
of these boundary lines can be established from an existing monument line. In
any case, the parcel map may be based upon a field survey made in conformance
with the Land Surveyor's Act.
   (D)   Consent by owner. The parcel map shall contain a certificate which
shall be signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title
interest in the real property being subdivided, consenting to the preparation
and recording of the parcel map. Such signatures shall be in accordance with
the provisions of
§ 152.073 of this chapter pertaining to final maps.
   (E)   Dedications. If dedication of streets, alleys, walkways, easements,
public utility easements or other public ways or access rights are required by
the Commission as conditions of approval of a parcel map, such dedications
shall either be shown on and offered by a certificate on the final parcel map,
or made by separate instrument as determined by the City Engineer. Such
certificate or instrument shall be signed by those parties having any record
title interest in the real property being subdivided in accordance with the
provisions of
§ 152.073 of this chapter pertaining to final maps.
   (F)   Engineer's statement. A statement executed by the engineer or surveyor
shall be affixed to the map pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 66449.
   (G)   Certification by City Engineer. Upon receipt of the final map,
together with the recording fees, and any required improvement security, the
City Engineer shall examine the same to determine whether the map is
technically correct and substantially conforms with tentative parcel map and
with all changes and requirements imposed as conditions of approval by the
Commission. The City Engineer shall also refer the parcel map to the secretary
of the Planning Commission for examination and determination if all the lots
and parcels created by the map conform with the requirements and the zoning
regulations of the city. Within 20 days after receiving the parcel map, the
City Engineer shall determine whether the parcel map fully conforms with all of
the requirements set forth herein and he shall comply with Cal. Gov't Code §
66450.
   (H)   Acceptance of dedications. Offers of dedication as set forth in
division (E) of this section shall be reviewed by the City Engineer for
compliance with the conditions of approval imposed by the Commission. If all
offers of dedication are in accordance with the requirements of the Commission,
the City Engineer shall recommend the acceptance of such dedications by the
authorized officials of the city.
   (I)   Security. If the Commission approves the tentative parcel map, it may
grant the subdivider a period of time after the recording of the parcel map in
which to complete the installation of the public improvements required as a
condition of the map by the Planning Commission. If such a time period is
granted, the Planning Commission shall require improvement security to be
posted in one of the forms set forth in
§ 152.076(A).
   (J)   Division of existing buildings. Prior to the recordation of a parcel
map which will result in the division of any existing building or buildings
into separate units or parts, the applicant shall secure certification by the
Chief Building Official that any building or buildings to be divided will,
after division, meet current code standards for new construction. As used in
this section, the phrase “current code standards” refers to all standards in
the current adopted editions of the Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing
Code, Mechanical Code, and Fire Code of the city.
   (K)   Recordation of parcel map. Upon certification by the City Engineer,
the parcel map shall be transmitted to the City Clerk, who shall cause the map
to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
(`67 Code, § 11-6-5)
§ 152.095 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building,
structure or other work on any parcel proposed to be created until a parcel map
has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Subdivision Map Act, and recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
(`67 Code, § 11-6-6)
§ 152.096 CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF MAPS.
   After a final map is filed in the office of the County Recorder, it may be
amended as provided in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66469 et seq.
(`67 Code, § 11-6-7)
§ 152.097 VESTING TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS.
   Whenever a tentative parcel map is required under this chapter, a vesting
tentative parcel map may be filed instead. At the time such a map is filed, it
shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative
Parcel Map.” The map shall be subject to the same procedures, time periods,
requirements and restrictions as described in
§ 152.060 for tentative subdivision map, except that the time periods specified
in
§ 152.060(E) shall be determined from the recordation of the parcel map instead
of the final map.
(`67 Code, § 11-6-8)
§ 152.098 WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP REQUIREMENTS.
   The requirement for a final parcel map may be waived by the Planning
Commission pursuant to the procedure set forth below:
   (A)   Submittal. A tentative parcel map application shall be submitted as
required by
§§ 152.091 and
152.092. At the time of submittal of the tentative parcel map, the property
owner must request, in writing, the waiving of the final parcel map
requirement.
   (B)   Findings required. The Planning Commission may waive the requirement
for a final parcel map when all of the following findings can be established:
      (1)   The proposed parcel(s) complies with the minimum area requirement
as established by
Chapter 153 of the City Code.
      (2)   The design of the proposed parcel(s) is in compliance with this
chapter and with all requirements of the city general plan.
      (3)   That all necessary improvements as required by this chapter and the
city general plan have been installed.
      (4)   All storm drainage facilities have been installed consistent with
the City's Storm Drainage Master Plan and the Standard Specifications.
      (5)   All lots front on city-maintained roads constructed as required by
the Standard Specifications.
      (6)   The proposed parcel(s) is adequately served with city sanitary
sewer service.
      (7)   The proposed parcel(s) is adequately served with city domestic
water facilities.
      (8)   That all lot lines and lot corners have been established in
compliance with the requirements of the Land Surveyor's Act.
      (9)   That the proposed division complies with all provisions of the
Subdivision Map Act and any city ordinances which provide for environmental
protection.
   (C)   Certificate of compliance filing requirements. Upon waiver of the
final parcel map requirement by the Commission, submission of the proper legal
descriptions, and the receipt of the fee for filing of a certificate of
compliance in such amount as may be fixed from time to time by resolution of
the City Council, the Director shall file a certificate of compliance for the
land being divided.
(`67 Code, § 11-6-9) (Ord. 89-09, passed 11-27-89)
OTHER MAPS
§ 152.110 REVERSION TO ACREAGE.
   Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. Proceedings for reversion to acreage may be initiated by the City
Council on its own motion or by petition of all of the owners of record of the
real property within the subdivision.
   (A)   Initiation of proceedings by owner(s). Proceedings to revert
subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition of all the owners
of record of property within the subdivision. The petition shall contain the
following information and such other information as required by the secretary
of the Planning Commission:
      (1)   Evidence of title to the real property.
      (2)   A tentative map in the form prescribed by
§ 152.057 of this chapter.
      (3)   A final map in the form prescribed by
§ 152.072 of this chapter, which delineates dedications which will not be
vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion.
      (4)   Evidence of one of the following:
         (a)   Consent of all the owners of an interest in the property, or
         (b)   That none of the improvements required to be made have been made
within two years from the date the final map was filed for record, or within
the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is
later, or
         (c)   That no lots shown on the final map or parcel map have been sold
within five years from the date such map was filed for record.
   (B)   Initiation of proceedings by City Council. The City Council on its own
motion may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage.
The City Council shall direct the secretary of the Planning Commission to
obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct proceedings.
   (C)   Fees. Petitions to revert property to acreage shall be accompanied by
a fee to cover the cost of processing and public hearing in an amount to be set
from time to time by resolution of the City Council. If the proceedings are
initiated pursuant to division (B) of this section, the person or persons who
requested the City Council to initiate the proceedings shall be responsible for
paying the fee established by resolution of the City Council. Fees are not
refundable.
   (D)   Proceedings.
      (1)   Public hearings shall be held before the Planning Commission and
the City Council on all reversions to acreage. Notice of the hearing shall be
given not less than ten days before the date of the hearing in the following
manner:
         (a)   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city, and
         (b)   By mailing the notice to the owners of all real property within
300 feet of the property which is the subject of the application.
      (2)   The City Council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it
finds and records in writing that:
         (a)   Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned
by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public
purpose, and
         (b)   Either:
            1.   The owner(s) of an interest in the real property within the
subdivision have consented to reversion; or
            2.   None of the improvements required to be made have been made
within two years from the date of the final or parcel map was filed for record,
or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements,
whichever is later; or
            3.   No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within
five years from the date the map was filed for record.
      (3)   The City Council may require as conditions for reversion:
         (a)   The owner(s) dedicate or offer to dedicate streets or easements.
         (b)   The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision
fees, deposits or improvement securities, if the same are necessary to
accomplish any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   Return of fees, deposits; release of securities. Except as provided in
division (D) of this section, upon filing of the final map for reversion to
acreage with the County Recorder, all fees and deposits shall be returned to
the subdivider and all improvement securities shall be released by the City
Council.
   (F)   Recording of final map. After the hearing before the City Council and
approval of the reversion, the final map shall be delivered to the County
Recorder. The reversion to acreage shall be effective upon the final map being
filed for record by the County Recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and
offers of dedication not shown on the final map for reversion shall be of no
further force and effect.
(`67 Code, § 11-7-1)
§ 152.111 RESUBDIVISION OF AN EXISTING SUBDIVISION.
   In the event an existing subdivision is resubdivided such that the street
alignment, lot design or drainage shall be changed, then the area constitutes a
new subdivision and the procedures for filing a tentative and final map as
outlined in this chapter apply. The filing of the final map or parcel map shall
constitute legal merging of the separate parcels into one parcel and the
resubdivision of such parcel.
(`67 Code, § 11-7-2)
§ 152.112 MERGER.
   A parcel or unit may be merged with a contiguous parcel or unit held by the
same owner in the following manners:
   (A)   When requested, in writing, by the owner of the property subject to
recording, at the owner's expense, a notice of merger, or
   (B)   In compliance with Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66451.10 et seq., if any one of
the contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to
standards for minimum parcel size under the city code, the following
requirements must be satisfied:
      (1)   At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any
structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit
was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an
accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single
structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a
contiguous parcel or unit.
      (2)   With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following
conditions exists:
         (a)   Comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the time of the
determination of merger;
         (b)   Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and
ordinances in effect at the time of its creation;
         (c)   Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety
equipment access and maneuverability.
      (3)   The procedures specified in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66451.10 et seq.
shall be used in merging parcels.
(`67 Code, § 11-7-3) (Ord. 89-09, passed 11-27-89)
§ 152.113 MERGER AND RE-SUBDIVISION.
   Subdivided lands may be merged and re-subdivided without reverting to
acreage by complying with all applicable requirements for the subdivision of
land as provided for in this title. The filing of the final map or final parcel
map shall constitute legal merging of the separate parcels into one parcel and
the re-subdivision of such parcel and the real property shall thereafter be
shown with the new lot or parcel boundaries on the assessment roll. Any unused
fees or deposits previously made pursuant to this title pertaining to the
property shall be credited pro rata towards any requirements for the same
purposes, which are applicable at the time of re-subdivision. Any streets or
easements to be left in effect after the re-subdivision shall be adequately
delineated on the map. After approval of the merger and re-subdivision by the
City Council, the map shall be delivered to the Recorder. The filing of the map
shall constitute legal merger and re-subdivision of the land affected thereby
and shall also constitute abandonment of all streets and easements not shown on
the map.
(Ord. 2001-09, passed 9-24-01)
§ 152.114 MERGER BY REQUEST OF PROPERTY OWNER.
   (A)   Upon request of the legal owner of contiguous parcels, the Community
Development Department may approve the merger of the parcels. The request shall
be in writing on a form approved by the Community Development Department and
shall be accompanied by data and documents, as required by the Community
Development Department.
   (B)   Upon approval, a Notice of Merger shall be filed with the Stanislaus
County Clerk Recorder's Office. The form and content of the notice shall be as
required by the Community Development Department of the city.
   (C)   In approving the merger, the city may impose reasonable conditions.
The reasonableness of the conditions may be appealed to the Planning Commission
within ten days of receipt of written notice of the conditions.
   (D)   A fee may be charged, not exceeding actual costs, as may be fixed from
time to time by the City Council.
(Ord. 2001-09, passed 9-24-01)
EXCEPTION
§ 152.125 AUTHORITY TO VARY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The City Council may vary the regulations relating to the subdivision
of land by granting an exception, provided it is shown by the subdivider that:
      (1)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
applicable to the property such as topography, fixed rights-of-way, unique
location of easements, and the like.
      (2)   Because of the unique nature of a particular subdivision concept,
design innovations are proposed which meet the functional standards of Zoning
and Subdivision Regulations without strict adherence to the requirements of
this chapter.
      (3)   In the case of a parcel map, the applicant is being denied the
preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other
property in the same vicinity or zone in which the property is located.
      (4)   The granting of the exception will not be injurious to other
property or improvements in the vicinity or zone in which the property is
located and will not nullify the intent and purpose of the general plan or
these regulations.
   (B)   Where it is determined by the City Council that the design of a
proposed subdivision is in compliance with a development plan which has been
adopted by the City Council in conjunction with a Planned Development Zone, the
City Council may approve such subdivision map without formally granting
exceptions for design factors which are not in strict compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   In granting an exception, the City Council may require such conditions
as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards
or requirements to be excepted.
(`67 Code, § 11-8-1)
§ 152.126 PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT.
   Prior to consideration by the City Council, all exceptions shall be reviewed
by the Planning Commission and a report made to the City Council.
(`67 Code, § 11-8-2)
§ 152.127 NOTICE.
   Public hearings shall be held before the Planning Commission and City
Council. The hearings shall be noticed by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation at least ten days prior to the meeting and by sending notices to
adjacent property owners.
(`67 Code, § 11-8-3)
§ 152.128 FEES.
   Requests for an exception shall be accompanied by a fee to cover the cost of
processing and public hearing in an amount to be set from time to time by
resolution by the City Council.
(`67 Code, § 11-8-4) (Ord. 89-09, passed 11-27-89)
PRELIMINARY SOIL REPORT
§ 152.140 PURPOSE.
   The Council declares that this subchapter is enacted to the requirements of
Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 17953 et seq.
(`67 Code, § 11-9-1)
§ 152.141 PRELIMINARY SOIL REPORT.
   Prior to the submission of the final subdivision map, the subdivider shall
file with the Building Inspector and the City Engineer, a preliminary soil
report, prepared by a civil engineer or soil engineer who is registered by the
state, based upon adequate test borings or excavations of every subdivision as
defined in Cal. Gov't Code § 66424. The preliminary soil report may be waived
if the Building Inspector and City Engineer shall determine that, due to their
knowledge as to the soil qualities of the subdivision, no preliminary analysis
is necessary.
(`67 Code, § 11-9-2)
§ 152.142 SOIL INVESTIGATION.
   If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of critically
expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to
structural defects, a soil investigation of each lot in the subdivision shall
be prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state. The soil
investigation shall recommend corrective action which is likely to prevent
structural damage to each dwelling proposed to be constructed on the expansive
soil. The report shall be filed with the Building Inspector and City Engineer.
(`67 Code, § 11-9-3)
§ 152.143 APPROVAL OF SOIL INVESTIGATION.
   The Building Inspector and City Engineer shall submit reports to the City
Council describing whether or not the recommended corrective action is likely
to prevent structural damage to each dwelling to be constructed on each lot in
the subdivision. The City Council may approve the subdivision or portion
thereof where such soil problems exist if it determines that the recommended
action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure. The building
permit shall be conditioned upon this incorporation of the approved recommended
corrective action in the construction of each structure.
(`67 Code, § 11-9-4) (Ord. 89-09, passed 11-27-89)
CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
§ 152.155 APPLICATION.
   Requests for issuance of a certificate of compliance shall be submitted, in
legible and readily reproducible writing, to the Community Development
Director, on paper accompanied by a plot plan and such other supporting
information as may be deemed necessary by the Director to determine compliance
and shall be accompanied by a checking fee in such amount as may be fixed from
time to time by resolution of the City Council.
(`67 Code, § 11-10-1)
§ 152.156 REVIEW.
   Within four weeks after filing of the request, the Director shall review the
request and determine whether the property, or the division thereof, complies
with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. If the
Director determines the property or the division thereof complies with the
provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter, a certificate of
compliance shall be issued. If the Director determines the property or the
division thereof does not comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act
and this chapter, the Director shall forward the request to the Commission. The
Commission, following a public hearing, shall then direct the Director to issue
either a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance.
A certificate of compliance may impose conditions as permitted by the
Subdivision Map Act. Any parcel created prior to April 27, 1966, shall be
conclusively presumed to have been lawfully created if the parcel resulted from
a division of land in which fewer than five parcels were created.
(`67 Code, § 11-10-2)
§ 152.157 FINAL MAP CONSTITUTES CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   A recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of
compliance with respect to the parcel described therein.
(`67 Code, § 11-10-3) (Ord. 89-09, passed 11-27-89)
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
§ 152.170 AUTHORITY.
   The Subdivision Map Act shall govern the processing of condominium
conversions within the city subject to the following modifications.
(`67 Code, § 11-11-1)
§ 152.171 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The City Council shall not approve a final map for a subdivision to be
created from the conversion of residential real property into a condominium
project, a community apartment project, or a stock cooperative project unless
it makes the findings as required by Cal. Gov't Code § 66427.1.
   (B)   The provisions of §
152.059(D) shall not apply to condominium projects or stock cooperatives, which
consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing structure, unless new
units are to be constructed or added. The city shall approve or disapprove the
conversion of an existing building to a stock cooperative within 120 days
following receipt of a completed application for approval of such conversion.
(`67 Code, § 11-11-2)
§ 152.172 CONVERSION OF A MOBILE HOME PARK.
   At the time of filing a tentative or parcel map for a subdivision to be
created from the conversion of a mobile home park to another use, the
subdivider shall also file a report on the impact of the conversion upon the
displaced residents of the mobile home park to be converted pursuant to Cal.
Gov't Code § 66427.4.
(`67 Code, § 11-11-3)
§ 152.173 FEES.
   No fee shall be charged by the city as a condition to the approval of a
tentative, final, or parcel map for a subdivision, or a division of land which
is not a subdivision, which consists of the conversion of a mobile home park to
condominium or stock cooperative ownership interests, except regulatory fees
charged for the issuance of a permit and those fees are authorized by Cal.
Gov't Code § 66451.2.
(`67 Code, § 11-11-4)
§ 152.174 COMPENSATION TO TENANTS.
   The compensation required by Cal. Gov't Code § 66452.8(c)(1) shall be
increased to $1,000.
(`67 Code, § 11-11-5) (Ord. 89-09, passed 11-27-89)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Plan adopted
   
153.002   Purpose
   
153.003   Definitions
   
153.004   Application and processing fee
Districts; Boundaries
   
153.010   Districts established
   
153.011   Degree of restrictiveness
   
153.012   Establishment of districts by map
   
153.013   Division of zoning map
   
153.014   Changes in boundaries
   
153.015   Location of boundaries
   
153.016   Land use restriction
Single-Family Residential District R-1 Zone
   
153.030   Regulations
   
153.031   Uses permitted
   
153.032   Uses permitted with a use permit
   
153.033   Building requirements
Duplex Residential District R-2 Zone
   
153.045   Regulations
   
153.046   Uses permitted
   
153.047   Uses permitted with a use permit
   
153.048   Building requirements
Multiple Family Residential District R-3 Zone
   
153.060   Regulations
   
153.061   Uses permitted
   
153.062   Uses permitted with a use permit
   
153.063   Building requirements
   
153.064   Development standards
Mixed Use District CX-1 Zone
   
153.066   Regulations
   
153.067   Use permitted
   
153.068   Uses permitted with a use permit
   
153.069   Exiting, continuing, and historic uses
   
153.070   Building requirements
   
153.071   Development standards
   
153.072   Application submittal and review
Neighborhood Commercial District C-1 Zone
   
153.075   Regulations
   
153.076   Uses permitted
   
153.077   Uses permitted with a use permit
   
153.078   Building requirements
   
153.079   Development standards
General Commercial District C-2 Zone
   
153.090   Regulations
   
153.091   Uses permitted, Planned Development Commercial
   
153.092   Uses permitted, Commercial
   
153.093   Uses permitted with a use permit, Commercial
   
153.094   Building requirements, Commercial
   
153.095   Development standards, Commercial
Commercial-Industrial C-M Zone
   
153.105   Regulations
   
153.106   Uses permitted
   
153.107   Uses permitted with a use permit
   
153.108   Building requirements
   
153.109   Development standards
Light Industrial M-1 Zone
   
153.120   Regulations
   
153.121   Uses permitted
   
153.122   Uses permitted with a use permit
   
153.123   Building requirements
   
153.124   Development standards
Heavy Industrial M-2 Zone
   
153.135   Regulations
   
153.136   Uses permitted
   
153.137   Uses permitted with a use permit
   
153.138   Building requirements
   
153.139   Development standards
Flood Plain District F Zone
   
153.150   Regulations
   
153.151   Uses permitted
Planned Development PD Zone
   
153.160   Purpose and intent
   
153.161   Provisions applicable to all PD districts
   
153.162   Master plan
   
153.163   Development plan
   
153.164   Property development standards
Tiny House Villages
   
153.170   Purpose
   
153.171   Applicability
   
153.172   Density
   
153.173   Occupancy
   
153.174   Design and development standards
   
153.175   Landscaping and open space
   
153.176   Accessory structures
   
153.177   Architecture and site plan review
General Regulations
   
153.180   Uses
   
153.181   Height limits
   
153.182   Building site area
   
153.183   Yards
   
153.184   Off-street parking requirements
   
153.185   Affordable housing density bonus
Nonconforming Uses
   
153.195   Use of land
   
153.196   Use not conforming
   
153.197   Use permit
   
153.198   Use of restricted nature
   
153.199   Abandonment
   
153.200   Damaged building
   
153.201   Repair, alterations
   
153.202   Interpretation
   
153.203   Minor expansion
Administrative Procedures
   
153.210   Purpose
   
153.211   Permits - general
   
153.212   Application
   
153.213   Supporting information
   
153.214   Review procedure
   
153.215   Public hearing notice
   
153.216   Use permits
   
153.217   Architecture and site plan review
   
153.218   Variance
   
153.219   Appeals
Reasonable Accommodation
   
153.221   Purpose
   
153.222   Applicability
   
153.223   Notice to the public of availability of accommodation process
   
153.224   Requesting reasonable accommodation
   
153.225   Reviewing authority
   
153.226   Required findings
   
153.227   Written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation
   
153.228   Appeals
Amendments
   
153.230   Provisions changed
   
153.231   Initiation
   
153.232   Planning Commission action
   
153.233   City Council action
   
153.234   Prezoning
   
153.235   Effect
Enforcement; Interpretation
   
153.245   Applicability to public agencies
   
153.246   Interpretation
   
153.247   Revocation; expiration of permits
   
153.248   Enforcement
   
153.249   Nuisance
   
153.250   Filing fees
   
153.251   Appeal
Home Occupations
   
153.265   Application
   
153.266   Criteria
   
153.267   Prohibited uses
Signs
   
153.280   Intent and purpose
   
153.281   Definitions
   
153.282   Administration
   
153.283   Nonconforming signs
   
153.284   General requirements
   
153.285   Specific requirements for certain zones
Sphere of Influence
   
153.295   Services to sphere of influence
Specific Plan District SP
   
153.305   Purpose
   
153.306   Authority
   
153.307   Applicability
   
153.308   Delineation of specific plan areas
   
153.309   Procedure
   
153.310   Application
   
153.311   Specific plan contents
   
153.312   Environmental review
   
153.313   Amendment
   
153.314   Expiration and extension
Accessory Dwelling Units
   
153.325   Purpose
   
153.326   Permitted locations and types
   
153.327   Development standards
   
153.328   Utilities and impact fees
   
153.329   Owner occupancy
   
153.330   Process and timing
Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Antennas
   
153.335   Purpose
   
153.336   Definitions
   
153.337   Applicability
   
153.338   General requirements
   
153.339   Permitted uses
   
153.340   Administratively approved uses
   
153.341   Conditional use permits
   
153.342   Buildings or other equipment storage
   
153.343   Removal of abandoned antennas and towers
   
153.344   Nonconforming uses
Retail Sale of Alcoholic Beverages
   
153.360   Purpose
   
153.361   Use permit required
   
153.362   Applicability of deemed approved alcoholic beverage sale regulations
   
153.363   Definitions
   
153.364   Performance standards and deemed approved activities
   
153.365   Automatic deemed approved status
   
153.366   Notification to owners of deemed approved activities
   
153.367   Procedure for consideration of violations to performance standards
   
153.368   Appeal on the revocation of a deemed approved status to the City
Council
   
153.369   Notification of public hearing
   
153.370   Fee schedule
   
153.371   Official action
   
153.372   Violations and penalties
   
153.373   Enforcement
   
153.374   Inspection and right of entry
200-Year Flood Protection
   
153.380   Intent
   
153.381   Definitions
   
153.382   200-year flood protection requirements for new development
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see
Ch. 111
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 PLAN ADOPTED.
   There is hereby adopted a zoning plan for the City of Riverbank, County of
Stanislaus, State of California, the zoning plan being a districting plan as
provided by law.
(`67 Code, § 10-1-1)
§ 153.002 PURPOSE.
   Zoning regulations for the city are hereby adopted and established to serve
the public health, safety and general welfare and to provide the economic and
social advantages resulting from an orderly planned use of land resources.
(`67 Code, § 10-1-2)
§ 153.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All words
used in the present tense shall include the future tense; all words in the
plural number shall include the singular number, and all words in the singular
number shall include the plural number, unless the natural construction of the
wording indicates otherwise.
   ACCESSORY. A building, part of a building or structure or use which is
subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to that of the main
building, structure or use on the same lot. Where an accessory building has a
wall or a portion of a wall not less than four feet in length in common with a
main building, such accessory building shall be considered a part of the main
building.
   ALLEY. Any public thoroughfare, not exceeding 30 feet in width, for the use
of pedestrians and/or vehicles which affords only a secondary means of access
to abutting property.
   APARTMENT. A room or suite of two or more rooms which is designed for,
intended for, and/or occupied by one family doing its own cooking therein.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling other than a hotel or a residential care home,
wherein lodging and meals are provided for compensation for more than five but
not more than ten persons other than the immediate members of the proprietor's
family.
   BUILDING (includes the word STRUCTURE). Any structure having a roof
supported by columns and/or walls and intended for the shelter, housing and/or
enclosure of any persons, animal or chattel. When any portion thereof is
completely separated from every other portion thereof by a masonry division or
fire wall without any window, door or any other opening therein, which wall
extends from the ground to the upper surface of the roof at every point, then
such portion shall be deemed to be a separate building.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental
to that of a main building on the same lot. Signs and fences are not to be
considered as accessory buildings. Where an accessory building does not have a
common wall of at least four feet in length with the main building on the same
lot, it shall be considered detached.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average level of
the highest and lowest point of that building site covered by the building to
the ridge or peak of the roof.
   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to the front lot line and at a distance
therefrom equal to the required depth of the front yard and extending across
the full width of the lot.
   BUILDING, MAIN. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot upon which it is situated. In any R district, any dwelling shall be deemed
to be a main building upon the lot upon which the same is situated.
   BUSINESS or COMMERCE. The purchase, sale or other transaction involving the
handling or disposition (other than as included in the term INDUSTRY as defined
herein) of any article, substance or commodity for profit or livelihood,
including office buildings, offices, shops for the sale of personal services,
garages, outdoor advertising signs, automobile parts, automobile courts and
recreational and amusement enterprises conducted for profit, but not including
junk yards.
   CARNIVAL. A traveling or itinerant commercial amusement enterprise
consisting of sideshows, vaudeville, games, merry-go-rounds or other mechanical
amusement devices temporarily located within the city. A CARNIVAL shall not be
construed to include or mean a festival or amusement.
   CIRCUS. A traveling or itinerant commercial amusement enterprise utilizing
an enclosure of any kind, but usually circular or rectangular, partially
surrounded by seats, used for exhibition or horsemanship, acrobatic
performances, acts of clowns, feats of animal training or the like, temporarily
located in the city.
   CLUB. An association of persons for some common, nonprofit purpose but not
including groups organized primarily to render a service which is customarily
carried on as a business.
   COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING. A building housing electrical and
mechanical equipment necessary for the conduct of a public utility
communications business, with or without personnel.
   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director of the
City of Riverbank.
   DAY CARE CENTER. Day care center means a dwelling or building or structure
in which persons not of the immediate family are provided with care for
compensation for a portion of the day not exceeding 12 hours in any 24-hour
period. A day care shall not include 24-hour care and shelter.
   DWELLING. A building or portion of a building designed for residential
purposes, including one-family, two-family and multiple family dwelling but not
including hotels, motels, boarding houses and lodging houses.
   DWELLING GROUP. A group of two or more or detached or semi-detached single-
family, two-family or multiple dwellings occupying a parcel of land in one
ownership.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building or portion thereof used or designed as a
residence for three or more families living independently of each other, and
doing their own cooking in the building.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE. A residential building containing one
dwelling unit on one lot. All rooms within the single-family attached dwelling
shall be interconnected. Single-family dwelling shall include a dwelling that
is constructed for the purposes of providing supportive and transitional
housing.
   DWELLING, TINY HOUSE. A detached single-family residence within a tiny house
village. A tiny house dwelling is defined as having a maximum floor area square
footage of 800 square feet and a minimum floor area square footage of 150
square feet.
   DWELLING, TWO FAMILY (DUPLEX). A detached building designed for and/or
occupied exclusively for two families living independently of each other, but
under one roof.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy by one
family for living or sleeping purposes, and having only one kitchen.
   DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY. An attached or detached residential dwelling unit
which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons.
It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking,
and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An
accessory dwelling unit also includes the following: (A) an efficiency unit;
and (B) a manufactured home.
   DWELLING UNIT, JUNIOR ACCESSORY. A unit that is no more than 500 square feet
in size and contained entirely within a single-family residence. A junior
accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities, or may
share sanitation facilities with the existing structure.
   E-CIGARETTE. Any electronic or battery-operated device, the use of which may
resemble smoking, that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of vapors,
including nicotine or other substances, this includes but is not limited to an
electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic
hookah, a vapor cigarette or any other product name or descriptor.
   EFFICIENCY KITCHEN. Means a kitchen that includes each of the following:
      (1)   A cooking facility with appliances.
      (2)   A food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are of
reasonable size in relation to the size of the junior accessory dwelling unit.
   EFFICIENCY UNIT. Has the same meaning as defined in Cal. Health & Safety
Code § 17958.1.
   EMERGENCY SHELTERS. Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless
persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless
person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of
an inability to pay.
   EMPLOYEE HOUSING. Defined the same as labor camp per Cal. Health & Safety
Code § 17021.5 and § 17021.6.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single
housekeeping unit, and distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house,
lodging house, motel or hotel.
   FAMILY DAY CARE CENTER. A day care center which also serves as the residence
of the licensee.
   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of several floors of the
building, excluding areas used for accessory garage purposes, and such basement
and cellar areas as are devoted exclusively to uses accessory to the operations
of the building. All horizontal dimensions shall be taken from the exterior
faces of walls including walls or other enclosures or enclosed porches.
Whenever the term is used in this title as a basis of requiring off-street
parking for any structure, it shall be assumed that, unless otherwise stated,
FLOOR AREA applies not only to the ground floor area but also to any additional
stories or basement of the structure.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The ratio of gross building floor area to total lot area
expressed as such. Example: two square feet of gross floor area for each three
square feet of total lot area would result in a floor area ratio of .66:1.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   GARAGE. An accessory building or an accessory portion of the main building,
enclosed on all sides, and with a clear vertical opening not to exceed nine
feet and designed or used for the shelter or storage of passenger vehicles and
located on the same lot as the dwelling to which it is accessory.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   GARAGE, PARKING. A building used for the parking of more than three
automobiles or trucks, whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building other than a private garage, enclosed on all
sides and used for the care, repair or equipping of automobiles, or where such
vehicles are kept for hire, sale or equipping.
   GARAGE SALES, YARD SALES, MOVING SALE, PATIO SALES and SIMILAR USES. The
retail sale of used or secondhand goods or merchandise in connection with a
lawfully existing dwelling unit on property within any zoning district provided
that:
      (1)   No such sale shall be conducted upon the same premises for more
than three consecutive days nor on more than two separate occasions within any
one calendar year.
      (2)   No such sale shall result in the use of more than two unlighted
signs not exceeding three square feet each in area. The signs to be displayed
only during such times as the sale is actually being conducted.
   GUEST HOUSE. Living quarters within an accessory building for temporary use
by guests of the occupants of the premises. The quarters shall have no kitchen
facilities and shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation conducted primarily within a dwelling unit
and carried on by persons residing in the dwelling unit, which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and
does not change the residential character thereof and in connection with which
there is no display nor stock in trade or commodities sold except those which
are produced on the premises. The home occupation must meet the requirements of
§§
153.265 through
153.267.
   HOOKAH LOUNGE. Any facility, building, structure or location, whether fixed
or mobile, where customers share a pipe commonly, but not always, made of
glass, used for vaporizing and smoking tobacco, flavored tobacco, shisha, dried
fruits, or other substances in which vapor or smoke is passed through a water
basin before inhalation. Hookah lounge includes, but is not limited to the use
of a communal hookah, waterpipe, shisha, narghile, or other such smoking
device.
   HOSPITAL, MENTAL. An institution licensed by the state to care for or treat
persons having mental or nervous disorders.
   HOTEL. Any building or portion thereof, containing six or more guest rooms
used, designed or intended to be used by paying guests. A motel shall be
considered a hotel.
   HOUSEHOLD PETS. Animals or fowl ordinarily permitted in the home and kept
for company or pleasure and not for profit, such as dogs, cats and canaries,
but not including a sufficient number of dogs or cats to constitute a kennel.
Household pets may also include not more than a total of 12 chinchillas,
hamsters, white mice or similar animals in combination.
   JUNK YARD. The use of more than 200 square feet of the area of any parcel,
lot, or contiguous lots or parcels for the storage or keeping of junk,
including but not limited to scrap materials, surplus material, secondhand
material or for the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles or
machinery.
   KENNEL. A place where four or more dogs or cats (or any combination of four
or more dogs and cats) of four months of age or older are kept.
   KITCHEN. Any room or space used, intended or designed to be used for cooking
or for the preparation of food for one family.
   LABOR CAMP. Any living quarters, dwelling, boarding house, tent, bunk house,
camper, mobile home or other housing accommodation, maintained for five or more
persons employed in connection with any agricultural work.
   LOT (includes the word PLOT). Land occupied or to be occupied by a building
and its accessory buildings or by a dwelling group and its accessory buildings,
together with such open spaces as are required under the provisions of this
title, having not less than the minimum area required by this title for a
building site in the district in which such lot is situated, and having its
principal frontage on a street.
   LOT, AREA. The total horizontal area included within the lot lines.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, or
bounded on two or more adjacent sides by street lines.
   LOT, DEPTH. The average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear
line measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.
   LOT, FRONTAGE. That portion of a lot abutting a public street.
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot.
   LOT, WIDTH. The distance between the side lines of a lot measured at the
building setback line.
   MOBILE HOME. A vehicle designed and equipped for human habitation as defined
by the Cal. Health & Safety Code § 18008.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A lot or parcel of land which is used exclusively for the
parking thereon of ten or more mobile homes for a rental charge or for rent or
lease of mobile homes, and for appurtenant facilities for the exclusive use of
the occupants such as laundry, rest rooms, recreation and storage facilities,
and mobile home, dwelling or office facility for the owner or manager.
   MOTEL. Any building or group of buildings containing sleeping rooms, with or
without cooking facilities, designed for temporary use by tourists or
transients, with garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each
unit, including auto parks, motor lodges, and tourist courts.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A building or land occupied by a use that does not
conform to the regulations for the district in which it is situated.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN. Any card, cloth, paper, metal, painted glass,
wooden, plaster, stone or other sign of any kind or character whatsoever placed
for advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, post, fence,
building, structure or thing whatsoever.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. Any structure of any kind or character
erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any outdoor
advertising sign may be placed, including outdoor advertising statuary.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   PARKING SPACE. An accessible and usable space on a building site of at least
nine-feet by 19-feet with access for the parking of automobiles. The length of
the space may be reduced by two feet if landscaped planters of sufficient width
are used as curb stops.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The City Planning Commission of the City of Riverbank.
   PUBLIC TRANSIT. Means a location, including, but not limited to, a bus stop
or train station, where the public may access buses, trains, subways, and other
forms of transportation that charge set fares, run on fixed routes, and are
available to the public.
   RECREATION VEHICLE. Either of the following:
      (1)   A motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer,
with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational,
emergency, or other occupancy, which meets all of the following criteria:
         (a)   It contains less than 320 square feet of internal living room
area, excluding built-in equipment, including but not limited to wardrobe,
closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, and bath or toilet rooms.
         (b)   It contains 400 square feet or less of gross area measured at
maximum horizontal projections.
         (c)   It is built on a single chassis.
         (d)   It is either self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently
towable on the highways without a permit.
      (2)   A park trailer designed for human habitation for recreational or
seasonal use only, which meets all of the following criteria:
         (a)   It contains 400 square feet or less of gross floor area measured
at the maximum horizontal projections. However, it may not exceed 12 feet in
width or 40 feet in length in the traveling mode.
         (b)   It is built on a single chassis.
         (c)   It may only be transported upon the public highways with a
permit.
(Cal. Health & Safety Code § 18010)
   RESIDENTIAL CARE HOME. A home operated as a boarding home and in which
nursing, dietary and other personal services are furnished to convalescent,
invalid or aged persons in return for compensation; but in which are performed
no surgical or other primary treatments such as are customarily provided in
sanitariums or hospitals and in which no persons are kept or served who
normally would be admissible to a mental hospital.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A dwelling, building or structure occupied by five or more
persons who have agreed to pay a specific rent for a specific space as
distinguished from guests subject to innkeeper's liability.
   SAWMILL. Any structure or land used for the manufacture or remanufacturing
of lumber or lumber products by the use of power equipment.
   SERVICE STATION. A structure or area which is provided for the servicing,
washing and fueling of motor vehicles, including minor repairs, and the storage
and sale of merchandise and supplies, incidental thereto, provided, however,
that the washing of automobiles shall be permitted only when no chain conveyor,
blower or steam cleaning device is involved.
   SHALL. Is mandatory and not directory.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it. If there is no floor above it, then
the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it shall be considered
a story. A basement shall not be considered a story when computing the height
of a building.
   STREET. A thoroughfare which has been dedicated or abandoned to the public
and accepted by proper public authority for a thoroughfare, not less than 30-
feet wide, which has been made public by right of use and which affords the
principal means of access to abutting property.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any changes in the supporting member of a building,
such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the
ground or attached to something having a location on the ground but not
including fences or walls used as fences not more than six feet in height or
free-standing signs.
   SUPPORTIVE HOUSING. Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is
occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an onsite or offsite
service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing,
improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live
and, when possible, work in the community.
   TANDEM PARKING. Means that two or more automobiles are parked on a driveway
or in any other location on a lot, lined up behind one another.
   TARGET POPULATION. Persons with low incomes who have one or more
disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other
chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided
pursuant to the Lanterman Development Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5
(commencing with §§ 4500 et seq. of the Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code))
and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families
with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care
system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless
people.
   TINY HOUSE VILLAGE.  A minimum of five tiny house dwellings on either a
single parcel or individual parcels for each tiny house dwelling as part of the
same subdivision.
   TRANSITIONAL HOUSING. Buildings configured as rental housing developments,
but operated under program requirements that require the termination of
assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program
recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than
six months from the beginning of the assistance.
   TRUCK TERMINAL. The storage of one or more commercial trucks which have a
body exceeding 12 feet in length in rear of the cab, or the storage of more
than one truck of any type. A truck shall not be normally construed as a means
of transportation in lieu of an automobile and not normally an accessory use to
a dwelling.
   USE. The purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, or
intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A use incidental and secondary to the principal use of a lot
or building located on the same lot as the accessory use.
   USED CAR. Any automobile, pickup truck of no more than a one ton load rating
or any van of no more than a one ton load rating.
   VAPOR BAR. Any facility building, structure of location, whether fixed or
mobile, where customers utilize a heating element that vaporizes liquid
solution that releases nicotine or flavored vapor, including the use of e-
cigarettes.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. An establishment for the care and treatment of animals,
including household pets, livestock and commercial poultry, all facilities to
be within a completely enclosed building except for exercising runs and parking
of automobiles.
   WRECKING YARD. The use of more than 200 square feet of the area of and lot
for the storage of immobile vehicles or the dismantling or wrecking of
automobiles or other vehicles or machinery.
   YARD. An open space other than a court on the same lot with a building,
which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except
as otherwise provided in this title.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of the lot and lying between
the front line and a line parallel thereto, and having a distance between such
parallel lines equal to the required front yard depth as prescribed in each
district.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the buildings as
prescribed for the district.
   YARD, SIDE. An area extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line,
and lying parallel thereto, within the lot and having a distance between such
parallel lines equal to the side yard width as prescribed in each district.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
(`67 Code, § 10-1-3) (Am. Ord. 2015-002, passed 2-24-15; Am. Ord. 2015-009,
passed 4-14-15; Am. Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 2021-007, passed
12-14-21; Am. Ord. 2023-003, passed 1-24-23)
§ 153.004 APPLICATION AND PROCESSING FEE.
   (A)   Application fee. An application fee is hereby established and imposed
on applicants for a permit, a request for legislative change, or an appeal
under this chapter, to cover the costs of all aspects of administration of the
city planning agency and all other city departments relating to the processing
and decision on the application. Application fees are intended to cover
application processing, review, and evaluation; meetings, consultations, and
research; hearings and appeals; preparation and revisions to plans and policies
that the city is required to adopt to make necessary findings and
determinations; environmental review and technical studies; consultant and
legal services, city staff and administrative overhead. The amount or method of
calculation of the application fee (including deposits and hourly rates), and
each component of the fee, shall be established by resolution of the City
Council.
   (B)   Application and processing fee options. Application and processing
fees shall be in the amount and subject to terms as follows:
      (1)   Application fee based on estimate of processing costs. An
application fee based on an estimate of the overall processing costs related to
the application shall be paid upon submission of the application. If the actual
cost of processing the application exceeds the initial deposit or fee paid, the
Community Development Director may mail notice to the applicant, using the
applicant's address stated in the application, specifying the amount of the
additional fee and stating that the additional fee is immediately due and
payable.
      (2)   Fee based on actual processing costs. An application fee based on
actual processing costs shall be calculated using the applicable hourly rate
and shall be billed and paid in accordance with administrative rules and
regulations established by the planning director. Monthly invoices shall be
mailed to the applicant, using the applicant's address stated in the
application, specifying the amount of fees incurred.
      (3)   Deposit based on actual processing costs. The City Manager or
Community Development Director may require a deposit or cost recovery
agreement, based on the city's estimate of the overall processing costs related
to the application. If a deposit is required, the application shall not be
deemed complete until the applicant provides the deposit, in cash or check, to
the city. A minimum balance of at least 25% of the initial deposit amount must
be maintained by the applicant at all times during the city's review and
processing of the development application, unless waived by the Planning
Director or City Manager because they determine that less than 25% of the
initial deposit is required to finish the city's review and processing of the
development application. The city shall provide monthly notices of the deposit
balance to applicants. Notices shall reflect the actual costs incurred by the
city in processing the application.
      (4)   Selection of application fee or deposit. The Planning Director
shall determine whether the fee for an application shall be fee-based or
deposit-based taking into account the project type and complexity.
      (5)   Suspension of application processing. The planning director shall
suspend the processing of an application if the applicant does not pay any
portion of an application fee or the minimum deposit within 30 days of such
request by the city. The application shall be reactivated following full
payment of fees or the minimum deposit, unless the application has been denied
or withdrawn.
      (6)   Fees paid in full prior to public hearing. All application fees and
actual processing costs shall be paid in full prior to (i) the first public or
administrative hearing to review the application or (ii) the city's final
determination regarding the application, whichever occurs first based on the
type of application and required approvals. No exceptions shall be made to any
developer or applicant.
   (C)   Appeal and modification. Notwithstanding §
153.251 of this chapter, the amount or propriety of an application fee or
deposit may be appealed to the City Council. The City Council, by resolution,
may waive or modify an application fee.
   (D)   Refund. If an application is voluntarily or involuntarily withdrawn
prior to a decision on the application, the applicant may be entitled to a
refund, without interest, of those portions of the application fee or deposit
paid to the city for performance of services or payment of costs associated
with the application that have not yet been performed or incurred. The
applicant must submit an application for the refund within 30 days of
withdrawal of the application. Failure to submit a timely application for a
refund shall be an absolute waiver of any right to the refund.
(Ord. 2014-004, passed 5-27-14)
DISTRICTS; BOUNDARIES
§ 153.010 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   In order to classify, regulate and segregate the uses of land and building,
to regulate the heights and bulk of buildings, and to regulate the area of
yards and other open spaces about buildings and to regulate the density of
population, 11 classes of districts are by this chapter established to be known
as follows:
R-1   Single-Family Residential District
R-2   Duplex Residential District
R-3   Multiple Family Residential District
CX-1   Mixed Use District
C-1   Neighborhood Commercial District
C-2   General Commercial District
C-M   Commercial Industrial District
M-1   Light Industrial District
M-2   Heavy Industrial District
F   Flood Plain District
P-D   Planned Development District
(`67 Code, § 10-2-1) (Am. Ord. 2014-006, passed 7-8-14)
§ 153.011 DEGREE OF RESTRICTIVENESS.
   MORE RESTRICTIVE USES as employed in this chapter means the following:
   (A)   Those uses first permitted in the R-1 district are the most
restrictive.
   (B)   All other uses are less restrictive districts in the sequence shown P-
D, R-2, R-3, CX-1, C-1, C-2, C-M, M-1 and M-2.
(`67 Code, § 10-2-2) (Am. Ord. 2014-006, passed 7-8-14)
§ 153.012 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS BY MAP.
   The location and boundaries of the various districts are shown on the
“Zoning Map of the City of Riverbank,” as amended, which is hereby adopted by
reference and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein. The map and all
notations, references, and other information shown thereon are hereby made a
part of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 10-2-3)
§ 153.013 DIVISION OF ZONING MAP.
   The zoning map may, for convenience, be divided into parts and each such
part may, for purposes of more readily identifying areas within such zoning
map, be subdivided into units and each of such parts and units may be
separately employed for purposes of amending the zoning map or for any official
reference to the zoning map.
(`67 Code, § 10-2-4)
§ 153.014 CHANGES IN BOUNDARIES.
   Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be made by ordinance adopting
an amended zoning map, or part of the map, which the amended maps, or part or
units of parts, when so adopted, shall be published in the manner prescribed by
law and become a part of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 10-2-5)
§ 153.015 LOCATION OF BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any district, the following
rules shall apply:
   (A)   Whenever the district boundary is indicated as being approximately
upon the centerline of a street, alley or block, or along a property line,
then, unless otherwise definitely indicated on the map, the center line of such
street, alley or block or such property line, shall be construed to be the
boundary of such district.
   (B)   When the application of the above rules does not clarify the zone
boundary location, the Planning Commission shall interpret the map.
(`67 Code, § 10-2-6)
§ 153.016 LAND USE RESTRICTION.
   No building shall hereafter be erected, nor shall any use of land be
conducted except the use of land for agricultural purposes so that the same
will be closer to the right-of-way line of any street than any official plan
line or any building line which has been established for such street.
(`67 Code, § 10-2-7) (Ord. 82-7, passed 9-27-82)
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-1 ZONE
§ 153.030 REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply in all R-1 Districts and shall be
subject to the provisions of §§
153.180 through
153.185 and §§
153.325 et seq. of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 10-3-1) (Am. Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-24-17)
§ 153.031 USES PERMITTED.
   (A)   One single-family dwelling or one manufactured home provided that the
manufactured home meets the following restrictions:
      (1)   Manufactured homes may be installed only if no more than ten years
has elapsed between the date of manufacture and the date of application for a
permit to install the manufactured home.
      (2)   Manufactured homes must be on a foundation system approved by
resolution of the City Council.
      (3)   All manufactured homes shall be subject to review and approval by
the Community Development Director with respect to orientation on the lot,
siding material, roofing materials and roof overhang to ensure, to the greatest
extent feasible, compatibility with surrounding structures. A pictorial
representation of the proposed manufactured home shall be submitted with the
application.
      (4)   No other dwelling units (i.e. single family, duplex, multiple
family, apartments or dwelling groups) shall be allowed on the same lot.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 2002-001, passed 1-28-02)
   (B)   Accessory buildings are normally incidental to a single-family
dwelling provided that such buildings are constructed concurrent with, or
subsequent to the construction of the single-family dwelling. NORMALLY
INCIDENTAL shall be deemed to mean that, in addition to a garage (either
attached or detached), the maximum size of the accessory building shall be
determined by maximum lot coverage.
      (1)   A detached accessory building, other than a covered patio as
defined herein, may occupy not more than 50% of a required rear yard, subject
to the following requirements within an "R" district:
         (a)   No detached accessory building shall be closer than six feet to
the main building, exclusive of roof covering;
         (b)   No detached accessory building shall be allowed within the
required yard areas, exclusive of roof covering;
         (c)   Seven and one-half feet shall be the maximum height for a "shed"
located at the setback line. A shed height may be increased one and one-half
feet for every one foot back from the setback line to a maximum height of 15
feet;
         (d)   A detached gazebo shall not be located closer than six feet to
the main building exclusive of roof covering; shall not exceed a maximum height
of 15 feet.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88; Am. Ord. 2004-001, passed 6-14-04)
   (C)   Family day care centers limited to six paying guests.
   (D)   Family day care centers for seven to 12 paying guests when the
following criteria are met:
      (1)   At least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each
employee.
      (2)   There are no other day care centers for more than six paying guests
within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject site.
      (3)   In addition to the required employee parking, there shall be
provided at least two off-street parking spaces for loading and unloading of
guests. These spaces shall be so located that vehicles head in and head out
without using the public street for maneuvering, loading or unloading.
   (E)   Home occupations as defined in §
153.003 and regulated in §§
153.265 through
153.267 of this chapter.
   (F)   Public parks and public buildings.
   (G)   Temporary real estate office and sign (not to exceed 100 square feet
in area) may be located on any new subdivision for a period of not more than
two years from the date of recording of the map of the subdivision upon which
the office and sign are located. This time limit shall automatically be
extended under the conditions in §
153.285(A)(1)(g) of this chapter.
   (H)   Temporary construction buildings to house tools and equipment or
containing supervisory office in connection with construction projects during
active construction on the same property.
   (I)   Residential care homes in which no more than six persons not of the
immediate family are provided with food, shelter and care for compensation, but
not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to
diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury.
   (J)   Signs as allowed in §§
153.280 through
153.285.
   (K)   Garage sales, as defined in §
153.003.
   (L)   Temporary uses such as a circus, carnival, fair or festival provided
that they meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The use shall be temporary in nature and shall not last more than
four days.
      (2)   The organizers of the event shall notify the Riverbank Police
Services Division of their intentions at least 30 days prior to the scheduled
beginning of the event.
      (3)   A business license shall be obtained as required by §
110.18 of the City Code.
      (4)   Licenses will only be issued to local businesses or shopping
centers when conducted on the same property as the business/shopping center or
to local nonprofit organizations.
   (M)   Temporary mobile home for ill or aged family members as regulated by §
153.219 of the City Code.
   (N)   Accessory dwelling unit meeting §§
153.325 et seq.
   (O)   One duplex on a corner lot, provided that the front door and garage of
each unit faces a different street and that garages are recessed five feet from
living quarters subject to an architectural and site plan review application
approved by the Community Development Director.
   (P)   Employee housing (no more than six workers per unit and no more than
12 units or 36 beds), farmworker housing, transitional housing, supportive
housing.
   (Q)   Tiny house village, as defined in §
153.003 and as allowed in §§
153.170 through
153.177.
(`67 Code, § 10-3-2) (Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 2003-014, passed 11-
10-03; Am. Ord. 2008-008, passed 9-8-08; Am. Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-24-17;
Am. Ord. 2023-003, passed 1-24-23)
§ 153.032 USES PERMITTED WITH A USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Churches and other religious institutions (excluding open-air or
tent).
   (B)   Schools, public utility, quasi-public buildings.
   (C)   Public or private automobile parking lots when adjacent to a C or M
district or to a PD district when used for commercial or industrial purposes.
   (D)   Mobile home park which meets the “Mobile Home Park Standards” as
adopted by resolution of the City Council.
   (E)   Family day care centers for seven to 12 paying guests when the
requirements of §
153.031(D) of this chapter are not met.
(`67 Code, § 10-3-3) (Ord. 92-06, passed 7-13-92; Am. Ord. 97-03, passed 1-27-
97; Am. Ord. 2003-014, passed 11-10-03; Am. Ord. 2008-008, passed 9-8-08; Am.
Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-24-17)
§ 153.033 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Height limit.
      (1)   For dwellings and other main buildings, including accessory
dwelling units – 35 feet.
      (2)   For accessory buildings and structures:
         (a)   Sheds: A subordinate structure or building used primarily for
storage purposes, of a height no greater than 15 feet and the total square
footage of which does not exceed 120 square feet. Sheds that exceed 120 square
feet shall require a building permit;
         (b)   Gazebos 15 feet: An accessory building consisting of a detached,
covered, free-standing, open-air structure not exceeding 300 square feet; and
         (c)   Skate ramps (half-pipes and similar structures):
            1.   For purposes of this section, HALF PIPE means a smooth-
surfaced outdoor structure shaped like a trough and used in gravity extreme
sports such as skateboarding, freestyle BMX, or in-line skating. Portions of
the half-pipe may be located below ground, but in no case shall any portion of
the half-pipe exceed four feet in height above ground level excluding hand
rails. If a change in elevation has occurred since the original construction of
the dwelling unit, for example a dirt pad constructed, the height of the half-
pipe excluding hand rails shall be two feet less than the top of a surrounding
six foot privacy fence.
            2.   Ramps shall be constructed with sound- dampening materials
such as insulation, foam-board sheathing, rammed earth, and similar. Consistent
with the general plan’s noise element, the recurring impulse noises created by
ramps shall not exceed 55 dBA between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. or
40 dBA between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Noise measurements shall be taken at a
side or rear property line.
   (B)   No fence (excluding wire fences and non-solid fences which do not
limit visibility as determined by the Planning Director) shall be constructed
in excess of eight feet in height within any side or rear yard, except fences
within the side or rear yard which enclose electrical substations which may be
constructed to the heights required by law.
      (1)   Architectural accent fences. Small architectural accent fences
within the required ten foot front yard setback, are allowed to be constructed
no higher than three feet out to the back of the sidewalk. They shall be
constructed and maintained so to be harmonious with the neighborhood. In no
case may a utility meter be enclosed. Fences shall remain a minimum of three
feet from all sides of a fire hydrant.
      (2)   Front yard courtyards. Courtyard is defined as an uncovered area
partly or wholly enclosed by buildings or walls and used primarily for
supplying access, light, and air to the dwelling. Walls shall not enclose more
than two sides of the courtyard. Courtyard walls shall be no higher than four
feet six inches. Front yard courtyard fences shall be constructed of material
and colors consistent and complementary to the design of the main structure.
Courtyards shall be determined by the Community Development Director and it is
recognized that not all dwelling types will have a courtyard. Courtyard fences
shall be located no closer than 13 feet behind the front property line.
      (3)   Solid fences, walls, hedges and retaining walls. Solid fences,
walls, hedges and retaining walls not more than seven feet in height may occupy
any required yard or other space, except that fences, walls, hedges and
retaining walls shall be no higher than three feet when located in the required
front yard setback area, in the required setback areas along the side street of
a corner lot and along the rear or side lot line of a reversed corner lot where
it abuts the front yard of the adjoining key lot. Walls and retaining walls
over four feet in height require engineering and a permit.
      (4)   Corner lots. Within the front or street side yard of a corner lot
in any district there shall be no solid fence, wall or hedge height greater
than three feet nor any obstruction other than a post, building column or tree
not more than two feet in diameter, between the height of three feet six inches
and ten feet above the top of the curb, or if no curb exists, above maximum
street grade.
      (5)   Transparent fences. Notwithstanding any other regulation herein,
fences with 90% transparency no higher than four feet may occupy the required
front setback area along the side street of a corner lot and along the rear or
side lot line or a reverse corner lot where it abuts the front yard of the
adjoining key lot. Vision through the fence shall remain totally unobstructed
at all times.
      (6)   Fence height. The height of a fence shall be measured from the
higher property elevation.
      (7)   Sight distance triangle - obstructions. No obstruction to view in
excess of three feet in height shall be placed in any corner or reverse corner
lot within a triangular area formed by the extension of the lot line to a point
of intersection and a line connecting them at a distance of 30 feet to said
intersection. Except for natural land formations, a sight distance triangle for
a driveway with a distance of ten feet from back of sidewalk towards the
dwelling and ten feet along the sidewalk in either direction shall be
maintained free of obstructions in excess of three feet in height.
      (8)   Fence permits. A fence permit, issued by the Community Development
Department shall be obtained prior to the erection of any fence over six feet
in height within the city.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 2004-001, passed 6-14-04)
   (C)   Yards and open spaces required.
      (1)   Front yard and side yard of a corner lot - not less than ten feet
from the planned right-of-way line provided that no vehicle opening of any
building is closer than 20 feet to the property line or planned right-of-way
line toward which the opening faces. Corner lot driveways shall not be located
on the half of the lot frontage nearest the radius return, or closer than 20
feet to said radius return.
      (2)   Side or rear yard when lot abuts an arterial - ten feet.
      (3)   Side or rear yard, interior lots all other cases - five feet.
      (4)   Detached accessory buildings - six feet from any other buildings.
      (5)   A detached accessory building or structure other than a covered
patio as defined herein, may not occupy more than 50% of a required rear yard,
subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   Within an "R" District, no detached accessory building shall be
closer than six feet to the main building, exclusive of roof covering.
         (b)   Within the R-1 District, no skate ramp (half-pipes and similar
structures) shall be closer than 12 feet to any property line and a minimum of
six feet from other structures.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90; Am. Ord. 2004-001, passed 6-14-04)
   (D)   Lot coverage. No more than 50% of the lot may be covered by buildings.
   (E)   Off-street parking. As required in §
153.184 of this chapter.
   (F)   Minimum building size.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings and mobile homes – 900 square feet.
      (2)   All other uses - no minimum size.
   (G)   Building site area and density required.
      (1)   Maximum permissible density is eight dwelling units per net acre.
      (2)   Minimum area - 6,000 square feet.
      (3)   Minimum width, interior lot – 55 feet.
      (4)   Minimum width, corner lot – 65 feet.
      (5)   Minimum depth – 100 feet unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Commission or City Council, whichever is the final decision-making body. Plot
plans of lots for which less than the minimum depth is requested, may be
required to ensure that the lot is usable for residential purposes.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (H)   Open space requirements. All multiple residential uses of two or more
dwelling units on one lot shall provide a fenced playground (or other open
space in the case of an adult-only facility) of at least 50 square feet per
unit with a minimum area of 300 square feet provided regardless of the number
of units. This area shall not be a lineal open space but should have a width to
depth ratio not exceeding one to two (1:2). Except in very large complexes
(more than 50 units) this required open space shall be in one location.
      (1)   Allowed uses include playgrounds, walking and biking paths/trails,
picnic areas, and community flower and vegetable gardens.
      (2)   Open space can be managed by a third party using land trusts or
conservation easements.
(`67 Code, § 10-3-4) (Ord. 2004-001, passed 6-14-04)
   (I)   Landscape areas. No more than 50% of a residential front yard shall be
paved and no more than 50% of a rear yard shall be paved. An interior side yard
may be paved if a minimum of one foot is left unpaved along the side property
line.
   (J)   Driveways. The minimum distance between approaches serving the same
parcel of land shall be 20 feet. The minimum setback of a driveway to a side
property line is five feet and from a dwelling unit three feet.
(Am. Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 2018-005, passed 8-28-18)
DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-2 ZONE
§ 153.045 REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply in the R-2 districts and shall be
subject to the provisions of §§
153.180 through
153.185 of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 10-4-1) (Am. Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-24-17)
§ 153.046 USES PERMITTED.
   (A)   A single-family dwelling or one duplex, or two dwelling units, except
that on parcels with no direct frontage on a city maintained street, only one
single-family dwelling is permitted.
   (B)   In lieu of all the residential uses listed in division (A) above, one
manufactured home per lot provided that the manufactured home meets the
following restrictions:
      (1)   Manufactured homes may be installed only if no more than ten years
has elapsed between the date of manufacture and the date of application for a
permit to install the manufactured home.
      (2)   Manufactured homes must be on a foundation system approved by
resolution of the City Council.
      (3)   All manufactured homes shall be subject to review and approval by
the Community Development Director with respect to siding material, roofing
materials and roof overhang to ensure, to the greatest extent feasible,
compatibility with surrounding structures. A pictorial representation of the
proposed manufactured home shall be submitted with the application.
      (4)   No other dwelling units (such as, single-family or duplex) shall be
allowed on the same lot.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 2002-001, passed 1-28-02)
   (C)   Accessory buildings normally incidental to dwellings provided that
such buildings are constructed concurrent with, or subsequent to the
construction of the dwellings. NORMALLY INCIDENTAL shall be deemed to mean
that, in addition to a garage(s) (either attached or detached) as required by
this title, the size of the accessory building does not exceed 20% of the
living area of the dwellings.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   (D)   Family day care centers limited to six paying guests.
   (E)   Family day care centers for seven to 12 paying guests when the
following criteria are met:
      (1)   At least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each
employee.
      (2)   There are no other day care centers for more than six paying guests
within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject site.
      (3)   In addition to the required employee parking, there shall be
provided at least two off-street parking spaces for loading and unloading of
guests. These spaces shall be located so that vehicles head in and head out
without using the public street for maneuvering, loading, or unloading.
   (F)   Home occupations as defined in §
153.003 and regulated in §§
153.265 through
153.267.
   (G)   Public parks and public buildings.
   (H)   Temporary real estate office and sign (not to exceed 100 square feet
in area) may be located on any new subdivision for a period of not more than
two years from the date of recording of the map of the subdivision upon which
the office and sign are located. This time limit shall automatically be
extended under the conditions described in §
153.285(A)(1)(g).
   (I)   Temporary construction building to house tools and equipment or
containing supervisory offices in connection with construction projects during
active construction on the same property.
   (J)   Residential care homes in which less than seven persons not of the
immediate family are provided with food, shelter and care for compensation, but
not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to
diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury.
   (K)   Signs as allowed in §§
153.280 through
153.285.
   (L)   Temporary uses such as a circus, carnival, fair or festival, provided
that they meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The use shall be temporary in nature and shall not last more than
four days.
      (2)   The organizers of the event shall notify the Riverbank Police
Services Division of their intentions at least 30 days prior to the scheduled
beginning of the event.
      (3)   A business license shall be obtained as required by §
110.18 of the City Code.
      (4)   Licenses will only be issued to local businesses or shopping
centers when conducted on the same property as the business/shopping center or
to local nonprofit organizations.
   (M)   Temporary mobile home for ill or aged family members as required by §
153.219.
   (N)   Garage sales as defined in §
153.003.
   (O)   Accessory dwelling unit meeting §§
153.325 et seq.
   (P)   Transitional and supportive housing.
   (Q)   Tiny house village, as defined in §
153.003 and as allowed in §
153.170 through
153.177.
(`67 Code, § 10-4-2) (Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-
24-17; Am. Ord. 2023-003, passed 1-24-23)
§ 153.047 USES PERMITTED WITH A USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Churches and other religious institutions (excluding open-air or
tent).
   (B)   Schools, public utilities, and quasi-public buildings.
   (C)   Public or private automobile parking lots when adjacent to any C or M
district or to any PD district which is used for commercial or industrial
purposes.
   (D)   Mobile home parks which meet the “Mobile Home Park Standards” as
adopted by resolution of the City Council.
   (E)   Family day care centers for seven to 12 paying guests when the
requirements of §
153.046(E) are not met.
   (F)   Duplex parcels with no direct frontage on a city maintained street.
   (G)   Accessory buildings that do not meet the requirements of §
153.046(C).
(`67 Code, § 10-4-3) (Ord. 92-06, passed 7-13-92; Am. Ord. 97-03, passed 1-27-
97; Am. Ord. 2003-014, passed 11-10-03; Am. Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-24-17)
§ 153.048 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Height limit.
      (1)   For dwellings and other main buildings, including accessory
dwelling units – 35 feet.
      (2)   For accessory buildings - 15 feet.
      (3)   No fence (excluding wire fences and nonsolid fences which do not
limit visibility as determined by the Community Development Director) shall be
constructed in excess of eight feet in height within any side or rear yard,
except fences within the side or rear yard which encloses electrical
substations, which may be constructed to the height required by law.
      (4)   No fence, hedge or screen planting (excluding wire fences and
nonsolid fences which do not limit visibility as determined by the Community
Development Director) shall be constructed or permitted to grow in excess of
three feet in height within any front yard or side yard of a corner lot.
   (B)   Building site area required.
      (1)   Minimum area – 6,000 square feet.
      (2)   Minimum width, interior lot – 55 feet.
      (3)   Minimum width, corner lot – 65 feet.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
      (4)   Minimum depth – 100 feet unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Commission or City Council, whichever is the final decision making body. Plot
plans of lots for which less than the minimum depth is requested may be
required to ensure that the lot is usable for residential purposes.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   (C)   Yards and open spaces required.
      (1)   Front yard and side yard of a corner lot - not less than 15 feet
from the planned right-of-way line, provided that no vehicle opening of any
building is closer than 20 feet to the property line or planned right-of-way
line toward which the opening faces.
      (2)   Side or rear yard when lot abuts an arterial – ten feet.
      (3)   Side or rear yard, interior lots, all other cases – five feet.
      (4)   Detached accessory buildings – ten feet from any other buildings.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
   (D)   Lot coverage. No more than 50% of the lot may be covered by buildings.
   (E)   Off-street parking. As required in §
153.184.
   (F)   Minimum building size.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings and mobile homes – 900 square feet.
      (2)   All other uses - No minimum size.
   (G)   Density. Maximum permissible density of 12 dwelling units per net
acre.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (H)   Open space requirements. All multiple residential uses of two or more
dwelling units on one lot shall provide a fenced playground (or other open
space in the case of an adult-only facility) of at least 50 square feet per
unit with a minimum area of 300 square feet provided regardless of the number
of units. This area shall not be a lineal open space but should have a width to
depth ratio not exceeding one to two (1:2). Except in very large complexes
(more than 50 units) this required open space shall be in one location.
(`67 Code, § 10-4-4) (Ord. 89-22, passed 1-8-90; Am. Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-
24-17)
MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-3 ZONE
§ 153.060 REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply in all R-3 districts and shall be
subject to the provisions of §§
153.180 through
153.185 of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 10-5-1) (Am. Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-24-17)
§ 153.061 USES PERMITTED.
   (A)   Single-family, duplex and multiple family dwellings, apartment houses,
dwelling groups, except that on parcels with no direct frontage on a city
maintained street, only one single-family dwelling is permitted.
   (B)   In lieu of all the residential uses listed in division (A) above, one
manufactured home per lot provided that the manufactured home meets the
following restrictions:
      (1)   Manufactured homes may be installed only if no more than ten years
has elapsed between the date of manufacture and the date of application for a
permit to install the manufactured home.
      (2)   Manufactured homes must be on a foundation system approved by
resolution of the City Council.
      (3)   All manufactured homes shall be subject to review and approval by
the Community Development Director with respect to lot orientation, siding
material, roofing materials and roof overhang to ensure, to the greatest extent
feasible, compatibility with surrounding structures. A pictorial representation
of the proposed manufactured home shall be submitted with the application.
      (4)   No other dwelling units (such as, single-family, duplex, multiple
family, apartments or dwelling groups) shall be allowed on the same lot.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 2002-001, passed 1-28-02)
   (C)   Accessory buildings normally incidental to permitted uses provided
that such buildings are constructed concurrent with, or subsequent to the
construction of the permitted use. NORMALLY INCIDENTAL shall be deemed to mean
that, in addition to a garage(s) (either attached or detached) as required by
this chapter, the size of the accessory building does not exceed 20% of the
area of the main building.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   (D)   Family day care centers limited to six paying guests.
   (E)   Family day care centers for seven to 12 paying guests when the
following criteria are met:
      (1)   At least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each
employee.
      (2)   There are no other day care centers for more than six paying guests
within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject site.
      (3)   In addition to the required employee parking, there shall be
provided at least two off-street parking spaces for loading and unloading of
guests. These spaces shall be located so that vehicles head in and head out
without using the public street for maneuvering, loading, or unloading.
   (F)   Home occupations as defined in §
153.003 and regulated in §§
153.265 through
153.267.
   (G)   Public parks and public buildings.
   (H)   Temporary real estate office and sign (not to exceed 100 square feet
in area) may be located on any new subdivision for a period of not more than
two years from the date of recording of the map of the subdivision upon which
the office and sign are located. This time limit shall automatically be
extended under the conditions described in §
153.285(A)(1)(g).
   (I)   Temporary construction building to house tools and equipment or
containing supervisory offices in connection with construction projects during
active construction on the same property.
   (J)   Residential care homes in which less than seven persons not of the
immediate family are provided with food, shelter and care for compensation, but
not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to
diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury.
   (K)   Signs as allowed in §§
153.280 through
153.285.
   (L)   Temporary uses such as a circus, carnival, fair or festival, provided
that they meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The use shall be temporary in nature and shall not last more than
four days.
      (2)   The organizers of the event shall notify the Riverbank Police
Services Division of their intentions at least 30 days prior to the scheduled
beginning of the event.
      (3)   A business license shall be obtained as required by §
110.18 of the City Code.
      (4)   Licenses will only be issued to local businesses or shopping
centers when conducted on the same property as the business/shopping center or
to local nonprofit organizations.
   (M)   Garage sales as defined in §
153.003.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (N)   Accessory dwelling unit meeting §§
153.325 et seq.
   (O)   Emergency shelters as defined in §
153.003.
   (P)   Transitional housing as defined in §
153.003.
   (Q)   Supportive housing as defined in §
153.003.
   (R)   Tiny house village, as defined in §
153.003 and as allowed in §
153.170 through
153.177.
(`67 Code, § 10-5-2) (Am. Ord. 2003-014, passed 11-10-03; Am. Ord. 2015-002,
passed 2-24-15; Am. Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 2023-003, passed
1-24-23)
§ 153.062 USES PERMITTED WITH A USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Churches and other religious institutions (excluding open-air or
tent).
   (B)   Schools, public utilities and quasi-public buildings.
   (C)   Public or private automobile parking lots when adjacent to any C or M
district or to any PD district which is used for commercial or industrial
purposes.
   (D)   Hotels, rooming or boarding houses.
   (E)   Professional offices.
   (F)   Labor camp.
   (G)   Institutions for treatment of alcoholics.
   (H)   Mobile home parks which meet the “Mobile Home Park Standards” as
adopted by resolution of the City Council.
   (I)   Family day care centers for seven to 12 paying guests when the
requirements of §
153.061(E) are not met.
   (J)   Duplex and multiple family dwellings, apartment houses and dwelling
groups on parcels with no direct frontage on a city maintained street.
   (K)   Accessory buildings that do not meet the requirements of §
153.061(C).
   (L)   Residential care homes for more than seven persons.
(`67 Code, § 10-5-3) (Ord. 92-06, passed 7-13-92; Am. Ord. 97-03, passed 1-27-
97; Am. Ord. 2003-014, passed 11-10-03; Am. Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-24-17)
§ 153.063 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Height limit.
      (1)   For dwellings and other main buildings three stories but in no case
to exceed 45 feet.
      (2)   For accessory buildings – 15 feet.
      (3)   No fence (excluding wire fences and nonsolid fences which do not
limit visibility as determined by the Community Development Director) shall be
constructed in excess of eight feet in height within any side or rear yard,
except fences within the side or rear yard which encloses electrical
substations, which may be constructed to the height required by law.
      (4)   No fence, hedge or screen planting (excluding wire fences and
nonsolid fences which do not limit visibility as determined by the Community
Development Director) shall be constructed or permitted to grow in excess of
three feet in height within any front yard or side yard of a corner lot.
   (B)   Building site area required.
      (1)   Minimum area:
         (a)   For one and two family dwellings or non-dwelling main buildings
– 6,000 square feet.
         (b)   For each unit in excess of two dwelling units – 2,000 square
feet, not to exceed 20 units per net acre.
      (2)   Minimum width, interior lot – 55 feet.
      (3)   Minimum width, corner lot – 65 feet.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
      (4)   Minimum depth – 100 feet unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Commission or City Council, whichever is the final decision making body. Plot
plans of lots for which less than the minimum depth is requested may be
required to ensure that the lot is usable for residential purposes.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   (C)   Yards and open spaces required - single-family dwellings, duplexes and
triplexes:
      (1)   Front yard and side yard of a corner lot - not less than 15 feet
from the planned right-of-way line, provided that no vehicle opening of any
building is closer than 20 feet to the property line or planned right-of-way
line toward which the opening faces.
      (2)   Rear yard when lot backs up to an arterial – ten feet.
      (3)   Side or rear yard, interior lots, all other cases – five feet.
      (4)   Detached accessory buildings, including accessory dwelling units -
ten feet from any other buildings.
   (D)   Yards and open spaces required - uses other than single-family
dwellings, duplexes and triplexes. The minimum setbacks shall be as required by
§
153.183(D) of this chapter.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
   (E)   Lot coverage. No more than 60% of the lot may be covered by buildings.
   (F)   Floor area ratio requirements.
      (1)   For single story buildings - 0.60:1.0.
      (2)   For two story buildings - 0.80:1.0.
      (3)   For three story buildings - 1.20:1.0.
   (G)   Minimum building size.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings and mobile homes – 900 square feet.
      (2)   All other uses - No minimum size.
(`67 Code, § 10-5-4) (Am. Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-24-17)
§ 153.064 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Trash storage area. Trash bins (except single-family dwellings,
duplexes, or dwelling groups) shall be provided in a fully enclosed trash
storage area. This area or areas shall be provided at locations that are
readily accessible to residents and sanitation collectors.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (B)   Landscaping plan. Landscaping plan for all uses (except single-family
dwellings, duplexes and triplexes) including plant species, initial size,
location, growth characteristics and method of irrigation shall be approved by
the Community Development Director prior to issuance of any permit. Such
required landscaping shall be installed prior to final inspection and shall be
maintained by the property owner. Approval shall be based on the degree of
compliance with landscape standards as adopted from time to time by City
Council.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 89-22, passed 1-8-90)
   (C)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking as required in §
153.184.
   (D)    Fencing. A six foot high solid fence shall be constructed along the
side and rear property lines, except as otherwise prohibited in this chapter,
for all apartments, dwelling groups and multiple family dwellings.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (E)   Open space requirements. All multiple residential uses of two or more
dwelling units on one lot shall provide a fenced playground (or other open
space in the case of an adult-only facility) of at least 50 square feet per
unit with a minimum area of 300 square feet provided regardless of the number
of
units. This area shall not be a lineal open space but should have a width to
depth ratio not exceeding one to two (1:2). Except in very large complexes
(more than 50 units) this required open space shall be in one location.
(Ord. 89-22, passed 1-8-90)
   (F)   Site plan review. Proposals to construct anything other than a single-
family dwelling, a duplex, a triplex or a fourplex on a parcel shall be subject
to site plan review by the Planning Commission prior to issuance of a building
permit. This review shall include, but not be limited to, comparison of the
project with the Architectural and Subdivision Design Standards as adopted by
the City Council.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90; Am. Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-24-17)
MIXED USE DISTRICT CX-1 ZONE
§ 153.066 REGULATIONS.
   District land uses, approval levels, building requirements and development
standards in this chapter apply, unless altered or superseded through the use
of a Planned Development Zoning District (§§
153.160 through
153.164) or adoption by the city of a Specific Plan or similar plan. The
provisions of the City Code are applicable when not otherwise addressed within
this chapter or superseded through the use of a Planned Development Zoning
District or adoption by the city of a Specific Plan or similar plan. Uses shall
be classified by primary or dominant use. Square footage thresholds for
conditional use permits are applicable to each separate use.
(Ord. 2014-006, passed 7-8-14)
§ 153.067 USES PERMITTED.
   (A)   All attached single-family and multi-family residential uses,
including duplexes, apartments, condominiums, townhouses, and live-work units
provided that the living units are located above the ground floor of a
commercial uses or adjacent to commercial on the same property.
   (B)   Detached residential uses with a minimum net density of eight units
per acre, including single family homes, caretaker units, and manufactured
homes.
   (C)   Attached Higher Density Residential in a vertical and/or horizontal
mixed use setting of 16 or more dwelling units per net acre. This residential
use must be above (on upper stories of buildings) or adjacent to commercial
operations on the same property.
   (D)   Office uses including administrative, professional, creative,
telecommunications, flex, research, and similar office uses that are primarily
worker-occupied.
   (E)   (1)   Retail sales of goods that can generally be carried out by the
customer including food and specialty foods, open air markets, small household
goods, pharmaceuticals and sundries, apparel, art and supplies, antiques,
furniture, appliances, electronics, books, flowers, hardware, toys, bicycles
and sporting goods, music, and similar goods.
      (2)   Sales of alcoholic beverages require a conditional use permit in
accordance with §
153.361.
   (F)   Service uses including personal and business services with walk-in
customer service, such as beauty parlors, spas, cleaners, repair services,
banks, travel or real estate agents, medical clinics, child or adult care,
photocopiers, mailing services, Laundromats, and similar uses. Rental uses of
items such as party supplies, wedding apparel or tuxedos are allowed as
services uses.
   (G)   (1)   General commercial uses including entertainment uses including
bars, full service restaurants, quick service restaurants (not drive through
fast food), dance and exercise studios, gyms, sports facilities, game arcades,
and similar uses.
      (2)   Sales of alcoholic beverages require a conditional use permit in
accordance with §
153.361.
   (H)   (1)   Civic uses including government offices and services, libraries,
community centers, conference facilities, and similar uses.
      (2)   Public infrastructure including support uses include water, storm
water, sewer, and utility infrastructure, streets, sidewalks, bicycle paths,
parking garages, transit stops, parks, plazas, streetscape improvements, and
other public facilities.
   (I)   Institutional uses including colleges, trade schools, places of
worship, museums, and similar uses.
   (J)   Tiny house villages, as defined in §
153.003 and as allowed in §
153.170 through
153.177.
(Ord. 2014-006, passed 7-8-14; Am. Ord. 2023-003, passed 1-24-23)
§ 153.068 USES PERMITTED WITH A USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Detached residential developments comprised of more than two acres
provided commercial development is in close proximity to the residential
development. Assisted living facilities and nursing homes.
   (B)   Transient occupancy uses, including hotels, bed and breakfasts,
timeshare units, and similar overnight occupancy uses.
   (C)   Retail sales of large items requiring outside storage or display, such
as building materials and nursery goods.
   (D)   Light Industrial uses in new buildings provided they have a retail
outlet on the same property and open to the public.
   (E)   Entertainment uses with live entertainment and/or amplified music/
sound, including theaters for motion pictures and stage performance. This
requirement does not include background sound used by most business to create
an atmosphere for customers.
(Ord. 2014-006, passed 7-8-14)
§ 153.069 EXISTING, CONTINUING, AND HISTORIC USES.
   Notwithstanding §§
153.195 through
153.203, an existing use, a continuance of a prior use, or a new use similar to
a prior use within an existing building, is allowed to continue or resume in
the same building and/or on the same site.
(Ord. 2014-006, passed 7-8-14)
§ 153.070 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Height limit.
      (1)   For principal buildings - not to exceed four stories or 50 feet,
whichever is lesser.
      (2)   For accessory buildings - 24 feet.
   (B)   Yards and open spaces required.
      (1)   Front, side or rear yard - the minimum setbacks shall be as
required by §
153.183(D).
      (2)   Detached accessory buildings - ten feet from any other buildings on
the lots.
      (3)   No vehicle opening of any building shall be closer than 20 feet to
the property line or planned right-of-way line toward which the opening faces.
      (4)   Loading docks shall be located so that trucks will head in and head
out and not use the public street for maneuvering, loading and unloading.
   (C)   (1)   Floor area ratio requirements.
      (2)   No maximum FAR.
(Ord. 2014-006, passed 7-8-14)
§ 153.071 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Applicability. District development standards in this section apply, unless
altered or superseded through the use of a Planned Development Zoning District
(§§
153.160 through
153.164) or adoption by the city of a Specific Plan or similar plan. Other City
Code development standards apply if not addressed in this section.
   (A)   Nuisances. No operation shall be conducted on any premises in such a
manner as to cause an unreasonable amount of noise, odor, dust, smoke,
vibration or electrical interference detectable off the site.
   (B)   Landscaping. A landscaping plan for all uses (except single-family
dwellings, duplexes and triplexes) including plant species, initial size,
location, growth characteristics and method of irrigation shall be approved by
the Community Development Director prior to issuance of any permit. Such
required landscaping shall be installed prior to final inspection and shall be
maintained by the property owner. Approval shall be based on the degree of
compliance with landscaping standards as adopted from time to time by the City
Council.
   (C)   Trash storage area. Trash bins (except single-family dwellings,
duplexes, or dwelling groups) shall be provided in a fully enclosed trash
storage area. This area or areas shall be provided at locations that are
readily accessible to residents and sanitation collectors.
   (D)   Off-Street parking.
      (1)   Non-residential uses. Not less than 2¼ spaces per 1,000 square feet
of building area.
      (2)   Shared parking between uses with different peak demand days or
times is encouraged to reduce total area used for parking. When the viability
of shared parking is demonstrated by the applicant, the minimum parking ratio
may be reduced by one space per 1,000 square feet of building area. Commercial
parking spaces shall be provided within 600 feet of the site.
      (3)   Residential uses. Not less than one space per unit.
      (4)   Assisted living facilities. Not less than ¼ space per unit.
      (5)   Transient occupancy uses. Not less than ½ space per room.
      (6)   Parking lots shall be located to sides and rears of buildings. No
more than 50% of a site's street frontage may consist of parking lot or
driveway.
      (7)   Uses not listed shall provide parking as required in §
153.184.
   (E)   Open space requirements. All multiple residential uses of two or more
dwelling units on one lot shall provide open space of at least 50 square feet
per unit with a minimum area of 300 square feet provided regardless of the
number of units. This area shall not be a lineal open space, but should have a
width and depth ratio not exceeding one to two (1:2). In very large complexes
(more than 50 units) this required open space can be in multiple locations and
all amenities approved by the Community Development Director.
(Ord. 2014-006, passed 7-8-14)
§ 153.072 APPLICATION SUBMITTAL AND REVIEW.
   Proposals to construct anything other than a single-family dwelling on a
parcel shall be subject to Site Plan review by the Planning Commission prior to
issuance of a building permit. This review shall include, but not limited to,
comparison of the project with the Architectural and Subdivision Design
Standards as adopted by the City Council. Applications for uses requiring a
conditional use permit shall conform to the requirements of §
153.216.
(Ord. 2014-006, passed 7-8-14)
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT C-1 ZONE
§ 153.075 REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply in all C-1 districts and shall be
subject to the provisions of §§
153.180 through
153.185 of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 10-7-1)
§ 153.076 USES PERMITTED.
   The following uses shall be allowed provided that the use is conducted
wholly within an enclosed building or within a six-foot high solid uniformly
painted fence and that no operation shall cause an unreasonable amount of
noise, odor, dust, mud, smoke, vibration, or electrical interference detectable
off the site.
   (A)   Churches (excluding open-air or tent), day care centers, private or
vocational schools, and public swimming pool.
   (B)   Offices, professional and other.
   (C)   Parking lots.
   (D)   Public or quasi-public utilities and buildings except those listed in
§ 153.077(I).
   (E)   Retail sales only when conducted entirely within an enclosed building,
including:
      (1)   Appliance (sales and service);
      (2)   Bakery (no baking permitted on-site);
      (3)   Camera;
      (4)   Candy (no candy-making on-site);
      (5)   China
      (6)   Clothing;
      (7)   Confections;
      (8)   Drapery (sewing and sales permitted);
      (9)   Pharmacy;
      (10)   Dry goods;
      (11)   Florists;
      (12)   Food;
      (13)   Groceries;
      (14)   Ice dealer (less than five tons, sales only);
      (15)   Jewelry (excluding wholesale manufacture);
      (16)   Liquor store;
      (17)   News dealer;
       (18)   Radio (sales and service);
      (19)   Shoes;
      (20)   Stationery;
      (21)   Tattoo establishments or body art establishments, subject to the
requirements of
Chapter 125;
      (22)   Television (sales and service);
      (23)   Variety; and
      (24)   Other uses which are determined by the Community Development
Director to be similar.
   (F)   Service establishments only when conducted entirely within an enclosed
building, including bank, barber shop, beauty shop, cafe, clinic (except
veterinary), delicatessen, dressmaking, ice cream parlor, launderette,
restaurant, tailor, and upholstery.
   (G)   Garage sales as defined in
§ 153.003.
   (H)   Signs as allowed in §§
153.280 through
153.285.
   (I)   Temporary construction building to house tools and equipment or
containing supervisory offices in connection with construction projects during
active construction on the same property.
   (J)   Temporary uses such as a circus, carnival, fair or festival, provided
that they meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The use shall be temporary in nature and shall not last more than
four days.
      (2)   The organizers of the event shall notify the Riverbank Police
Services Division of their intentions at least 30 days prior to the scheduled
beginning of the event.
      (3)   A business license shall be obtained as required by
§ 110.18 of the city code.
      (4)   Licenses will only be issued to local businesses or shopping
centers when conducted on the same property as the business/shopping center or
to local nonprofit organizations.
      (5)   The use need not be in an enclosed building or fenced.
   (K)   Home occupations as defined in
§ 153.003 and regulated in §§
153.265 through
153.267 when conducted within an existing home.
   (L)   Accessory buildings normally incidental to permitted uses, provided
that such buildings are constructed concurrent with, or subsequent to the
construction of the permitted use.
(`67 Code, § 10-7-2) (Am. Ord. 98-02, passed 7-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015- 001,
passed 2-24-15)
§ 153.077 USES PERMITTED WITH A USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Alcohol treatment center, hospital (including mental and sanitarium).
   (B)   Bakery or candy store where baked goods or candy are made on the
premises.
   (C)   Borrow pit to a depth of more than three feet.
   (D)   Church (including open-air), fairgrounds, and race track other than as
allowed in
§ 153.076(J).
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (E)   Duplex, dwelling group, labor camp, single-family dwelling or mobile
home parks which meet the “Mobile Home Park Standards” as adopted by resolution
of the City Council.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   (F)   Hobby kennels that meet the following requirements:
      (1)   No more than ten dogs over four months old.
      (2)   All dogs must be owned by the property owner.
      (3)   Kennel must be accessory to existing single-family dwelling.
   (G)   Natural mineral resources, the development of, or exploration for,
together with the necessary buildings, apparatus, or appurtenances incidental
thereto.
   (H)   Secondhand stores or used merchandise (the sale of secondhand
automobiles, wrecked automobiles, and junk are prohibited) offered for sale,
provided that all materials displayed or offered for sale be within an enclosed
building.
(Am. Ord. 98-02, passed 7-13-98)
   (I)   Utility facilities including communication equipment buildings and
electrical substations, together with the necessary buildings, apparatus or
appurtenances thereto.
   (J)   One mobile home if the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The mobile home shall be clearly secondary to the commercial use of
the property.
      (2)   There are no other residences on the property.
      (3)   The mobile home shall not be rented or leased independent of the
principal use to which it is necessary.
      (4)   The exterior of the mobile home shall be compatible with the
commercial building(s) on the property.
      (5)   The permit shall be reviewed annually to ensure continued
compliance with the provisions of this title.
      (6)   A finding shall be made that other feasible security measures have
been tried and that there is a demonstrated need for additional security.
   (K)   Apartments, boarding houses, multiple dwelling, dwelling groups, and
rooming houses provided it is determined that the use will not adversely affect
commercial uses in the area and that commercial uses will not adversely affect
the proposed use.
   (L)   Service stations (excluding major repair).
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (M)   Residential care homes for more than seven persons, provided it is
determined that the care home will not adversely affect commercial uses in the
area and that commercial uses will not adversely affect the proposed care home.
(Ord. 89-03, passed 6-26-89)
   (N)   Emergency shelters as defined in §
153.003.
   (O)   Transitional housing as defined in §
153.003.
   (P)   Supportive housing as defined in §
153.003.
   (Q)   Hookah lounges and vapor bars, as defined in §
153.003 and shall meet the following minimum proximity requirements:
      (1)   No hookah lounge or vapor bar shall be located within 1,000 feet of
any other such shop.
      (2)   No hookah lounge or vapor bar shall be located within 500 feet of
any parcel of land zoned for residential use.
      (3)   No hookah lounge or vapor bar shall be located within 600 feet of
any parcel of land that contains any one or more of the following specific land
uses:
         (a)   Religious facility;
         (b)   Courthouse;
         (c)   Day nursery;
         (d)   Public playground/park/recreation area;
         (e)   School;
         (f)   Vocational or professional institution; or
         (g)   Institution of higher education, including community or junior
college, college, or university.
(`67 Code, § 10-7-3) (Am. Ord. 2015-002, passed 2-24-15; Am. Ord. 2015-009,
passed 4-14-15)
§ 153.078 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Height limit.
      (1)   No structure (excepting conventional television aerials) shall
exceed two stories or 35 feet.
      (2)   No fence, hedge, or screen planting (excluding wire fences, and non
solid fences which do not limit visibility as determined by the Community
Development Director) shall be constructed or permitted to grow in excess of
three feet in height within any front yard or side yard of a corner lot.
   (B)   Building site area required.
      (1)   Minimum area, dwellings:
         (a)   For one and two family dwellings - 6,000 square feet.
         (b)   For each unit in excess of two dwelling units - 2,000 square
feet, not to exceed 20 units per net acre.
      (2)   Minimum area, commercial uses - sufficient to provide the minimum
yard and parking requirements.
      (3)   Minimum width, interior lot - 55 feet.
      (4)   Minimum width, corner lot - 65 feet.
      (5)   Minimum depth - 100 feet.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (C)   Yards and open spaces required - single-family dwellings, duplexes,
and triplexes.
      (1)   Front yard and side yard of a corner lot - none except that a
building shall not be closer than ten feet to any street less than 70 feet in
width.
      (2)   Side or rear yard, interior lots - none except if the C-1 district
abuts an R district the yard shall be five feet.
      (3)   Detached accessory buildings - ten feet from any other buildings on
the lots.
      (4)   No vehicle opening of any building shall be closer than 20 feet to
the property line or planned right-of-way line toward which the opening faces.
   (D)   Yards and open spaces required - uses other than single-family
dwellings, duplexes, and triplexes.
      (1)   Front, side or rear yard - the minimum setbacks shall be as
required by
§ 153.183(D).
      (2)   Detached accessory buildings - ten feet from any other buildings on
the lots.
      (3)   No vehicle opening of any building shall be closer than 20 feet to
the property line or planned right-of-way line toward which the opening faces.
      (4)   Loading docks shall be so located that trucks will head in and head
out and not use the public street for maneuvering, loading and unloading.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
   (E)   Floor area ratio requirements - residential uses.
      (1)   For single story buildings - 0.60:1.0
      (2)   For two story buildings - 0.80:1.0
(`67 Code, § 10-7-4)
§ 153.079 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Nuisances. No operation shall be conducted on any premises in such a
manner as to cause an unreasonable amount of noise, odor, dust, smoke vibration
or electrical interference detectable off the site.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (B)   Screening. An eight-foot high solid, decorative masonry wall shall be
constructed along the property line adjacent to any residential zone or any PD
zoning for residential use except that no such wall shall be required if the
property line abuts an alley.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
   (C)   Landscaping. A landscaping plan for all uses (except single-family
dwellings, duplexes and triplexes) including plant species, initial size,
location, growth characteristics and method of irrigation shall be approved by
the Community Development Director prior to issuance of any permit. The
required landscaping shall be installed prior to final inspection and shall be
maintained by the property owner. Approval shall be based on the degree of
compliance with landscape standards as adopted from time to time by the City
Council.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 89-22, passed 1-8-90)
   (D)   Trash storage area.  Trash bins (except single-family dwellings,
duplexes, or dwelling groups) shall be provided in a fully enclosed trash
storage area. This area or areas shall be provided at locations that are
readily accessible to residents and sanitation collectors.
   (E)   Off-street parking.  Off-street parking shall be provided as required
in
§ 153.184. A circulation plan for all nonresidential uses shall be required for
all new development and shall include truck loading and unloading facilities.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (F)   Open space requirements. All multiple residential uses of two or more
dwelling units on one lot shall provide a fenced playground (or other open
space in the case of an adult-only facility) of at least 50 square feet per
unit with a minimum area of 300 square feet provided regardless of the number
of units. This area shall not be a lineal open space but should have a width to
depth ratio not exceeding one to two (1:2). Except in very large complexes
(more than 50 units) this required open space shall be in one location.
(Ord. 89-22, passed 1-8-90)
   (G)   Site plan review. Proposals to construct anything other than a single-
family dwelling, a duplex, a triplex or a four-plex on a parcel shall be
subject to site plan review by the Planning Commission prior to issuance of a
building permit. This review shall include, but not be limited to, comparison
of the project with the Architectural and Subdivision Design Standards as
adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
(`67 Code, § 10-7-5)
GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT C-2 ZONE
§ 153.090 REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply in all C-2 districts and shall be
subject to the provisions of
§§ 153.180 through
153.185 of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 10-8-1)
§ 153.091 USES PERMITTED, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT COMMERCIAL.
   For properties designated Planned Development Commercial on the land use
element of the city general plan, any change in existing use of the property
shall require an application for and approval of a planned development zone to
conform with the requirements of §§
153.160 through
153.164.
(`67 Code, § 10-8-2)
§ 153.092 USES PERMITTED, COMMERCIAL.
   For those properties designated commercial on the land use element of the
city general plan, the following are permitted uses, provided that the use is
conducted wholly within an enclosed building or within a six-foot high solid,
uniformly painted fence and that no operation shall cause an unreasonable
amount of noise, odor, dust, mud, smoke, vibration or electrical interference
detectable off the site.
   (A)   Hotels and motels.
   (B)   Churches (excluding open-air or tent), day care centers, vocational
schools, and public swimming pool.
   (C)   Clubhouse, community center, lodge, social hall.
   (D)   Offices, professional and other.
   (E)   Parking lots.
   (F)   Public or quasi-public utilities and buildings except those listed in
§
153.093(M).
   (G)   Retail stores , wares, or other merchandise unless otherwise regulated
by this chapter.
   (H)   Secondhand stores or used merchandise (the operation or sale of
secondhand automobiles, wrecked automobiles, and junk are prohibited) offered
for sale, provided that all materials displayed or offered for sale be within
an enclosed building.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 98-03, passed 7-13-98)
   (I)   Service establishments including automobile steam cleaning, bank, bar,
barber shop, bath, beauty shop, cafe, car wash, clinic, dance studio,
delicatessen, delivery service, drapery cleaning, dressmaking, drive-in
restaurant, equipment rental, ice cream parlor, laboratory experimental, motion
picture, testing, launderette, laundry, meat locker, mini warehouses when
enclosed by a solid masonry wall at least six feet in height, museum, parking
garage, photography, printing establishment, radio station, repair shops
(appliance, radio, television), recreation center (when not otherwise regulated
by this chapter), restaurant, sign painting, tailor, taxi stand, television
studio, theater, upholstery and veterinary.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   (J)   Stamps, rubber or metal (manufacture or assembly).
   (K)   Temporary construction building to house tools and equipment or
containing supervisory offices in connection with construction projects during
active construction on the same property.
   (L)   Temporary uses such as a circus, carnival, fair or festival, provided
that they meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The use shall be temporary in nature and shall not last more than
four days.
      (2)   The organizers of the event shall notify the Riverbank Police
Services Division of their intentions at least 30 days prior to the scheduled
beginning of the event.
      (3)   A business license shall be obtained as required by
§ 110.18 of the city code.
      (4)   Licenses will only be issued to local businesses or shopping
centers when conducted on the same property as the business/shopping center or
to local nonprofit organizations.
      (5)   The use need not be in an enclosed building or fence.
   (M)   Signs as allowed in §§
153.280 through
153.285.
   (N)   Garage sales as defined in
§ 153.003.
   (O)   Home occupations as defined in
§ 153.003 and regulated in §§
153.265 through
153.267 when conducted within an existing home.
   (P)   Accessory buildings normally incidental to permitted uses provided
that such buildings are constructed concurrent with, or subsequent to the
construction of the permitted use.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (Q)   Body and fender shops subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   There shall be no painting of any kind (including spot painting) on
the premises.
      (2)   All work shall be conducted within the building.
      (3)   The area required to meet the off-street parking requirements of
§ 153.184(C) shall not be used to store cars for more than 24 hours.
      (4)   All cars to be stored for more than 24 hours shall be stored within
the building or in a storage area that is surrounded by a six-foot high solid
fence.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   (R)   Tattoo establishments or body art establishments, subject to the
requirements of
Chapter 125.
(`67 Code, § 10-8-3) (Am. Ord. 2015-001, passed 2-24-15)
(`67 Code, § 10-8-3)
§ 153.093 USES PERMITTED WITH A USE PERMIT, COMMERCIAL.
   For properties designated commercial on the land use element of the city
general plan, the following uses are permitted subject to securing a use
permit:
   (A)   Alcohol treatment center, hospital (including mental and sanitarium).
   (B)   Bakery or candy store where baked goods or candy are made on the
premises.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (C)   Body and fender shops if any painting is to be done subject to the
following restrictions:
      (1)   All work shall be conducted within the building.
      (2)   The area required to meet the off-street parking requirements of
 § 153.184(C) shall not be used to store cars for more than 24 hours.
      (3)   All cars to be stored for more than 24 hours shall be stored within
the building or in a storage area that is surrounded by a six-foot high solid
fence.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   (D)   Borrow pit to a depth of more than three feet.
   (E)   Church (including open-air), fairgrounds, race track and open-air
theater other than as allowed in §
153.092(L).
   (F)   Contractor's yard, when enclosed within a six-foot high fence or
screen planting.
   (G)   Hobby kennels that meet the following requirements:
      (1)   No more than ten dogs over four months old.
      (2)   All dogs must be owned by the property owner.
      (3)   Kennel must be accessory to existing single-family dwelling.
   (H)   Labor camp, mobile home park.
   (I)   Natural mineral resources, the development of, or exploration for,
together with the necessary buildings, apparatus, or appurtenances incidental
thereto.
   (J)   Retail sales limited to boats, building materials, or lumber yards
(must be enclosed by a six-foot fence), mobile homes, trucks and similar uses.
   (K)   Secondhand stores and used merchandise (the sale, storage, or
operation of automobile wrecking yards are prohibited), provided that the
following criteria is met and the findings established by
§ 153.216, Use Permits:
      (1)   Such business is carried on, maintained, and conducted entirely
inside an enclosed building or buildings unless the premises on which such
business is carried on, maintained, or conducted be entirely enclosed by a
solid masonry or wood fence or wall at least six feet in height and constructed
according to the requirements of the Building Code as adopted in
§ 150.01;
      (2)   Such fence or wall shall be maintained in a neat, substantial, safe
condition and shall be painted;
      (3)   No merchandise of said business shall be piled or permitted to be
piled in excess of the height of the enclosing fence or wall or nearer than two
feet thereto.
(Am. Ord. 98-03, passed 7-13-98)
   (L)   Service establishments limited to bus terminals, carpet cleaning
service, cemetery, draying/ freighting/storage (when provided with a lock box
system so emergency personnel have access to information regarding materials
currently stored on the property), massage parlor, mausoleum, and service
station.
   (M)   Utility facilities including communication equipment buildings and
electrical substations, together with the necessary buildings, apparatus or
appurtenances thereto.
   (N)   One mobile home if the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The mobile home shall be clearly secondary to the commercial use of
the property.
      (2)   There are no other residences on the property.
      (3)   The mobile home shall not be rented or leased independent of the
principal use to which it is necessary.
      (4)   The exterior of the mobile home shall be compatible with the
commercial building(s) on the property.
      (5)   The permit shall be reviewed annually to ensure continued
compliance with the provisions of this title.
      (6)   A finding shall be made that other feasible security measures have
been tried and that there is a demonstrated need for additional security.
   (O)   Apartments, boarding houses, multiple dwelling, dwelling groups, and
rooming houses, provided that it is determined that the use will not adversely
affect commercial uses in the area and that commercial uses will not adversely
affect the proposed use.
   (P)   Residential care homes for more than seven persons, provided it is
determined that the care home will not adversely affect commercial uses in the
area and that commercial uses will not adversely affect the proposed care home.
(Ord. 89-03, passed 6-26-89)
   (Q)   New and used car lots in which all of the cars are in operable
condition without major body damage which exceeds 20% of the fair market value
of the vehicle. Such lots shall be paved and landscaped with an automatic
irrigation system and shall include an office and rest room facilities. Used
car lots need not be within an enclosed building or fence.
(Ord. 98-03, passed 7-13-98)
   (R)   Emergency shelters as defined in §
153.003.
   (S)   Transitional housing as defined in §
153.003.
   (T)   Supportive housing as defined in §
153.003.
   (U)   Hookah lounges and vapor bars, as defined in §
153.003 and shall meet the following minimum proximity requirements:
      (1)   No hookah lounge or vapor bar shall be located within 1,000 feet of
any other such shop.
      (2)   No hookah lounge or vapor bar shall be located within 500 feet of
any parcel of land zoned for residential use.
      (3)   No hookah lounge or vapor bar shall be located within 600 feet of
any parcel of land that contains any one or more of the following specific land
uses:
         (a)   Religious facility;
         (b)   Courthouse;
         (c)   Day nursery;
         (d)   Public playground/park/recreation area;
         (e)   School;
         (f)   Vocational or professional institution; or
         (g)   Institution of higher education, including community or junior
college, college, or university.
(`67 Code, § 10-8-4) (Am. Ord. 2015-002, passed 2-24-15; Am. Ord. 2015-009,
passed 4-14-15)
§ 153.094 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS, COMMERCIAL.
   For properties designated commercial on the land use element of the city
general plan, the following requirements apply:
   (A)   Height limit.
      (1)   No building or structure shall exceed six stories or 70 feet,
whichever is the lesser.
      (2)   No fence, hedge, or screen planting (excluding wire fences, and
nonsolid fences which do not limit visibility as determined by the Community
Development Director) shall be constructed or permitted to grow in excess of
three feet in height within any front yard or side yard of a corner lot.
   (B)   Building site area required.
      (1)   Minimum area, residential:
         (a)   First two units - 6,000 square feet.
         (b)   For each unit in excess of two dwelling units - 2,000 square
feet, not to exceed 20 units per net acre.
      (2)   Minimum area, commercial uses - sufficient to provide the minimum
yard and parking requirements.
      (3)   Minimum width, interior lot - 55 feet.
      (4)   Minimum width, corner lot - 65 feet.
      (5)   Minimum depth - 100 feet.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (C)   Yards and open spaces required.
      (1)   Front, side or rear yard - the minimum setbacks shall be as
required by
§ 153.183(D).
      (2)   Detached accessory buildings - ten feet from any other buildings on
the lots.
      (3)   No vehicle opening of any building shall be closer than 20 feet to
the property line or planned right-of-way line toward which the opening faces.
      (4)   Loading docks shall be so located that trucks will head in and head
out and not use the public street for maneuvering, loading and unloading.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
   (D)   Floor area ratio requirements - residential uses.
      (1)   For single-story buildings - 0.60:1.0
      (2)   For two-story buildings - 0.80:1.0
      (3)   For three-story buildings - 1.20:1.0
(`67 Code, § 10-8-5)
§ 153.095 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS, COMMERCIAL.
   For properties designated commercial on the land use element of the general
plan, the following requirements apply:
   (A)   Nuisances. No operation shall be conducted on any premises in such a
manner as to cause an unreasonable amount of noise, odor, dust, smoke vibration
or electrical interference detectable off the site.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (B)   Screening. An eight-foot high solid, decorative masonry wall shall be
constructed along the property line adjacent to any residential zone or any PD
zoning for residential use except that no such wall shall be required if the
property line abuts an alley.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
   (C)   Landscaping. A landscaping plan for all uses (except single-family
dwellings, duplexes and triplexes) including plant species, initial size,
location, growth characteristics and method of irrigation shall be approved by
the Community Development Director prior to issuance of any permit. Such
required landscaping shall be installed prior to final inspection and shall be
maintained by the property owner. Approval shall be based on the degree of
compliance with landscape standards as adopted from time to time by the City
Council.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 89-22, passed 1-8-90)
   (D)   Trash storage area.  Trash bins (except single-family dwellings,
duplexes, or dwelling groups) shall be provided in a fully enclosed trash
storage area. This area or areas shall be provided at locations that are
readily accessible to residents and sanitation collectors.
   (E)   Off-street parking.  Off-street parking shall be provided as required
in
§ 153.184. A circulation plan for all nonresidential uses shall be required for
all new development and shall include truck loading and unloading facilities.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (F)   Open space requirements. All multiple residential uses of two or more
dwelling units on one lot shall provide a fenced playground (or other open
space in the case of an adult-only facility) of at least 50 square feet per
unit with a minimum area of 300 square feet provided regardless of the number
of units. This area shall not be a lineal open space but should have a width to
depth ratio not exceeding one to two (1:2). Except in very large complexes
(more than 50 units) this required open space shall be in one location.
(Ord. 89-22, passed 1-8-90)
   (G)   Site plan review. Proposals to construct anything other than a single-
family dwelling, a duplex, a triplex or a four-plex on a parcel shall be
subject to site plan review by the Planning Commission prior to issuance of a
building permit. This review shall include, but not be limited to, comparison
of the project with the Architectural and Subdivision Design Standards as
adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
(`67 Code, § 10-8-6)
COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL C-M ZONE
§ 153.105 REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply in all C-M districts and shall be
subject to the provisions of §§ 153.180 through 153.185 of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 10-8A-1)
§ 153.106 USES PERMITTED.
   The following uses shall be allowed providing that the use is conducted
wholly within an enclosed building or within a six-foot high solid uniformly
painted fence, and no operation shall cause an unreasonable amount of noise,
odor, dust, mud, smoke, vibration or electrical interference detectable off the
site:
   (A)   Appliance, assembly of electrical appliance (such as, radios,
phonographs, and the like).
   (B)   Armature winding.
   (C)   Auction house or store.
   (D)   Automobile and truck service including the following:
      (1)   Automobile dismantling within a building.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
      (2)   Automobile repair, body work, and steam cleaning subject to the
following restrictions:
         (a)   There shall be no painting of any kind (including spot painting)
on the premises.
         (b)   All work shall be conducted within the building.
         (c)   The area required to meet the off-street parking requirements of
§ 153.184(C) shall not be used to store cars for more than 24 hours.
         (d)   All cars to be stored for more than 24 hours shall be stored
within the building or in a storage area that is surrounded by a six-foot high
solid fence.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
      (3)   Truck repair and steam cleaning.
   (E)   Bakery, retail or wholesale.
   (F)   Bar.
   (G)   Bottling plant, soft drinks.
   (H)   Building materials or lumber yard when screened by a six-foot high
solid fence or hedge.
   (I)   Candy, sales and manufacture of.
   (J)   Car wash.
   (K)   Cemetery, columbarium, crematory, mausoleum.
   (L)   Community center, social hall, lodge, clubhouse, dance studio.
   (M)   Electronic instruments and equipment, assembly of.
   (N)   Farm machinery, sales, storage, repair and rental.
   (O)   Frozen food lockers.
   (P)   Garage sales as defined in
§ 153.003.
   (Q)   Glass studio, stained, and the like, including edging, beveling and
silvering in connection with sale of mirror and glass for decorating purposes.
   (R)   Home occupations as defined in
§ 153.003 and regulated in
§§ 153.265 through
153.267 when conducted within an existing home.
   (S)   Hospitals, hotels, motels.
   (T)   Ice dealer (less than five tons), sales only.
   (U)   Milk dealer, creamery and dairy products manufacture.
   (V)   Mini-warehouses when enclosed by a solid masonry wall at least six
feet in height.
   (W) Offices, professional and others.
   (X)   Parcel delivery service.
   (Y)   Public buildings and utilities of all types.
   (Z)   Parking lots.
   (AA)   Recreation centers.
   (BB)   Retail sales including but not limited to those listed in
§§ 153.092 and
153.093(J) of the city code.
   (CC)   Schools, vocational.
   (DD)   Secondhand or used merchandise sales that comply with
§ 117.01 of the city code. Used car lots shall only be permitted when all of
the cars are in operable condition without major body damage which exceeds 20%
of the fair market value of the vehicle, when the lot is paved and when an
office and rest room facilities are provided. Used car lots need not be in an
enclosed building or fence.
   (EE)   Seed processing and packaging, treatment, storage, and sales.
   (FF)   Service establishments including but not limited to those listed in
§§ 153.092 and
153.093(L) of the city code unless otherwise further restricted under
§ 153.107.
   (GG)   Sheet metal shop.
   (HH)   Signs as allowed in
§§ 153.280 through
153.285.
   (II)   Storage of boats, trailers, and RV's.
   (JJ)   Swimming pool, public.
   (KK)   Tattoo establishments or body art establishments, subject to the
requirements of
Chapter 125.
   (LL)   Television or radio transmitter.
   (MM)   Temporary uses such as a circus, carnival, fair, or festival,
provided that they meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The use shall be temporary in nature and shall not last more than
four days.
      (2)   The organizers of the event shall notify the Riverbank Police
Services Division of their intentions at least 30 days prior to the scheduled
beginning of the event.
      (3)   A business license shall be obtained as required by §
110.18 of the city code.
      (4)   Licenses will only be issued to local businesses or shopping
centers when conducted on the same property as the business/shopping center or
to local nonprofit organizations.
      (5)   The use need not be in an enclosed building or fence.
   (NN)   Temporary construction building to house tools and equipment or
containing supervisory offices in connection with construction projects during
active construction on the same property.
   (OO)   Theater, indoor.
   (PP)   Tin smith.
   (QQ)   Utilities.
   (RR)   Veterinary hospital.
(`67 Code, § 10-8A-2) (Am. Ord. 2015-001, passed 2-24-15)
§ 153.107 USES PERMITTED WITH A USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Automobile and truck painting.
   (B)   Amusement park, carnival, circus, fairgrounds, open-air church, open-
air theater, and race track other than as allowed in
§ 153.106(LL).
   (C)   Apartments, boarding houses, multiple dwelling, dwelling groups and
rooming houses provided it is determined that the use will not adversely affect
commercial uses in the area and that commercial uses will not adversely affect
the proposed use.
   (D)   Borrow pit to a depth of more than three feet.
   (E)   Bus terminal.
   (F)   Ceramic products, manufacture of, using previously pulverized clay and
kilns fired only by electricity or low pressure gas.
   (G)   Cleaning (including carpet) and dyeing plant.
   (H)   Contractor's yard, when enclosed within a six-foot high fence or
screen planting.
   (I)   Draying, freighting and storage when provided with a lock box system
so emergency personnel have access to information regarding materials currently
stored on the property.
   (J)   Dump, refuse disposal, and sewage disposal plant.
   (K)   Feed and fuel (solid) yard.
   (L)   Massage parlor.
       (M)   Natural mineral resources, the development of, or exploration for,
together with the necessary buildings, apparatus, or appurtenances incidental
thereto.
   (N)   One dwelling unit if the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The dwelling unit shall be clearly secondary to the commercial use
of the property.
      (2)   There are no other residences on the property.
      (3)   The dwelling unit shall not be rented or leased independent of the
principal use to which it is necessary.
      (4)   The exterior of any residential unit shall be compatible with the
commercial building(s) on the property.
      (5)   The permit shall be reviewed annually to ensure continued
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (6)   A finding shall be made that other feasible security measures have
been tried and that there is a demonstrated need for additional security.
   (O)   Service station.
   (P)   Tire recapping, rebuilding, retreading.
   (Q)   Warehouse, wholesale building.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (R)   Automobile repair, body work, and steam cleaning subject to the
following restrictions:
      (1)   All work shall be conducted within the building.
      (2)   The area required to meet the off-street parking requirements of
§ 153.184(C) shall not be used to store cars for more than 24 hours.
      (3)   All cars to be stored for more than 24 hours shall be stored within
the building or in a storage area that is surrounded by a six-foot high solid
fence.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   (S)   Emergency shelters as defined in §
153.003.
   (T)   Transitional housing as defined in §
153.003.
   (U)   Supportive housing as defined in §
153.003.
   (V)   Hookah lounges and vapor bars, as defined in §
153.003 and shall meet the following minimum proximity requirements:
      (1)   No hookah lounge or vapor bar shall be located within 1,000 feet of
any other such shop.
      (2)   No hookah lounge or vapor bar shall be located within 500 feet of
any parcel of land zoned for residential use.
      (3)   No hookah lounge or vapor bar shall be located within 600 feet of
any parcel of land that contains any one or more of the following specific land
uses:
         (a)   Religious facility;
         (b)   Courthouse;
         (c)   Day nursery;
         (d)   Public playground/park/recreation area;
         (e)   School;
         (f)   Vocational or professional institution; or
         (g)   Institution of higher education, including community or junior
college, college, or university.
(`67 Code, § 10-8A-3) (Am. Ord. 2015-002, passed 2-24-15; Am. Ord. 2015-009,
passed 4-14-15)
§ 153.108 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Height limit.
      (1)   No building or structure shall exceed six stories or 70 feet,
whichever is the lesser.
      (2)   No fence, hedge, or screen planting (excluding wire fences, and
nonsolid fences which do not limit visibility as determined by the Community
Development Director) shall be constructed or permitted to grow in excess of
three feet in height within any front yard or side yard of a corner lot.
   (B)   Building site area required.
      (1)   Minimum area, residential:
         (a)   First two units - 6,000 square feet.
         (b)   For each unit in excess of two dwelling units - 2,000 square
feet, not to exceed 20 units per net acre.
      (2)   Minimum area, commercial uses - sufficient to provide the minimum
yard and parking requirements.
      (3)   Minimum width, interior lot - 55 feet.
      (4)   Minimum width, corner lot - 65 feet.
      (5)   Minimum depth - 100 feet.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (C)   Yards and open spaces required.
      (1)   Front, side or rear yard - the minimum setbacks shall be as
required by
§ 153.183(D).
      (2)   Detached accessory buildings - ten feet from any other buildings on
the lots.
      (3)   No vehicle opening of a building shall be closer than 20 feet to
the property line or planned right-of-way line towards which the opening faces.
      (4)   Loading docks shall be so located that trucks will head in and head
out and not use the public street for maneuvering, loading and unloading.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
   (D)   Floor area ratio requirements - residential uses.
      (1)   For single-story buildings - 0.60:1.0
      (2)   For two-story buildings - 0.80:1.0
      (3)   For three-story buildings - 1.20:1.0
(`67 Code, § 10-8A-4)
§ 153.109 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Nuisances. No operation shall be conducted on any premises in such a
manner as to cause an unreasonable amount of noise, odor, dust, smoke vibration
or electrical interference detectable off the site.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (B)   Screening. An eight-foot high solid, decorative masonry wall shall be
constructed along the property line adjacent to any residential zone or any PD
zoning for residential use except that no such wall shall be required in the
property line abuts an alley.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
   (C)   Landscaping. A landscaping plan for all uses (except single-family
dwellings, duplexes and triplexes) including plant species, initial size,
location, growth characteristics and method of irrigation shall be approved by
the Community Development Director prior to issuance of any permit. Such
required landscaping shall be installed prior to final inspection and shall be
maintained by the property owner. Approval shall be based on the degree of
compliance with landscape standards as adopted from time to time by the City
Council.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 89-22, passed 1-8-90)
   (D)   Trash storage area.  Trash bins (except single-family dwellings,
duplexes, or dwelling groups) shall be provided in a fully enclosed trash
storage area. This area or areas shall be provided at locations that are
readily accessible to residents and sanitation collectors.
   (E)   Off-street parking.  Off-street parking shall be provided as required
in
§ 153.184. A circulation plan for all nonresidential uses shall be required for
all new development and shall include truck loading and unloading facilities.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (F)   Open space requirements. All multiple residential uses of two or more
dwelling units on one lot shall provide a fenced playground (or other open
space in the case of an adult-only facility) of at least 50 square feet per
unit with a minimum area of 300 square feet provided regardless of the number
of units. This area shall not be a lineal open space but should have a width to
depth ratio not exceeding one to two (1:2). Except in very large complexes
(more than 50 units) this required open space shall be in one location.
(Ord. 89-22, passed 1-8-90)
   (G)   Site plan review. Proposals to construct anything other than a single-
family dwelling, a duplex, a triplex or a four-plex on a parcel shall be
subject to site plan review by the Planning Commission prior to issuance of a
building permit. This review shall include, but not be limited to, comparison
of the project with the Architectural and Subdivision Design Standards as
adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
(`67 Code, § 10-8A-5)
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL M-1 ZONE
§ 153.120 REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply in all M-1 districts and shall be
subject to the provisions of §§
153.180 through
153.185 of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 10-9-1)
§ 153.121 USES PERMITTED.
   (A)   Any use permitted in
§ 153.106 (commercial-industrial zone) shall be permitted in the M-1 zone
except dwellings unless otherwise specifically permitted in this district,
hospitals, labor camps, schools, and recreation centers.
   (B)   Armature winding, brewery, communications equipment building, pumping
plant, stone monument sales and cutting, stone processing, transfer, utility
service yard and substations.
   (C)   Manufacture of advertising structures and billboards, business
machines, candy, clothing, household equipment, musical instruments, novelties,
printing establishments, shoes, soap (cold mix only), stamps (rubber and metal)
textiles, and tiles (small wall and floor).
   (D)   Manufacture of assembly of previously prepared materials of bone,
canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn,
leather, metals (precious or semi-precious), paper, plastics, rubber, shell,
stone (precious or semi-precious), straw, textiles, or tobacco.
   (E)   Vocational schools or hospitals when incidental to and located upon
the same property as a commercial or industrial use otherwise permitted in this
District.
   (F)   Boat building (limited to those craft which may be transported over a
state highway without permit) and boat sales.
   (G)   Contractor's yards when enclosed within a six-foot high solid fence.
   (H)   Signs as allowed in §§
153.280 through
153.285.
   (I)   Garage sales as defined in
§ 153.003.
   (J)   Fortune-telling as defined and regulated by
Chapter 114 of the city code and provided that such establishments are located
at least 1,000 feet apart.
(`67 Code, § 10-9-2)
§ 153.122 USES PERMITTED WITH A USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Airport landing field.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (B)   Battery rebuilding, plastic processing, poultry and rabbit processing,
rubber processing, and slaughtering.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   (C)   Amusement park, carnival, circus, fairgrounds, open-air church, open-
air theater, and race track and recreation centers.
   (D)   Borrow pit to a depth of more than three feet.
   (E)   Ceramic products, manufacture of, using previously pulverized clay and
kilns fired only by electricity or low pressure gas.
   (F)   Cleaning (including carpet) and dyeing plant.
   (G)   Draying, freighting and storage when provided with a lock box system
so emergency personnel have access to information regarding materials currently
stored on the property.
   (H)   Dump, refuse disposal, and sewage disposal plant.
   (I)   Feed and fuel (solid) yard.
   (J)   Manufacture of cameras and photographic equipment, drugs, ice,
perfumes, pharmaceutical, toilet soap and toiletries.
   (K)   Natural mineral resources, the development of, or exploration for,
together with the necessary buildings, apparatus, or appurtenances incidental
thereto.
   (L)   One dwelling unit if the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The dwelling unit shall be clearly secondary to the commercial use
of the property.
      (2)   There are no other residences on the property.
      (3)   The dwelling unit shall not be rented or leased independent of the
principal use to which it is necessary.
      (4)   The exterior of any residential unit shall be compatible with the
commercial building(s) on the property.
      (5)   The permit shall be reviewed annually to ensure continued
compliance with the provisions of this title.
      (6)   A finding shall be made that other feasible security measures have
been tried and that there is a demonstrated need for additional security.
   (M)   Service stations.
   (N)   Tire recapping, rebuilding, retreading.
   (O)   Warehouse, wholesale building.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (P)   Automobile repair, body work, and steam cleaning subject to the
following restrictions:
      (1)   All work shall be conducted within the building.
      (2)   The area required to meet the off-street parking requirements of
§ 153.184(C) shall not be used to store cars for more than 24 hours.
      (3)   All cars to be stored for more than 24 hours shall be stored within
the building or in a storage area that is surrounded by a six-foot high solid
fence.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   (Q)   Food processing not otherwise listed.
(Ord. 89-02, passed 5-22-89)
(`67 Code, § 10-9-3)
§ 153.123 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Height limit.
      (1)   No building or structure shall exceed six stories or 70 feet,
whichever is the lesser.
      (2)   No fence, hedge, or screen planting (excluding wire fences, and
nonsolid fences which do not limit visibility as determined by the Community
Development Director) shall be constructed or permitted to grow in excess of
three feet in height within any front yard or side yard of a corner lot.
   (B)   Building site area required.
      (1)   Minimum area - sufficient to provide the minimum yard and parking
requirements.
      (2)   Minimum width, interior lot - 55 feet.
      (3)   Minimum width, corner lot - 65 feet.
      (4)   Minimum depth - 100 feet.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (C)   Yards and open spaces required.
      (1)   Front, side or rear yard - the minimum setbacks shall be as
required by
§ 153.183(D).
      (2)   Detached accessory buildings - ten feet from any other buildings on
the lots.
      (3)   No vehicle opening of any building shall be closer than 20 feet to
the property line or planned right-of-way line towards which the opening faces.
      (4)   Loading docks shall be so located that trucks will head in and head
out and not use the public street for maneuvering, loading and unloading.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
(`67 Code, § 10-9-4)
§ 153.124 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Nuisances. No operation shall be conducted on any premises in such a
manner as to cause an unreasonable amount of noise, odor, dust, smoke vibration
or electrical interference detectable off the site.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (B)   Screening. An eight-foot high solid, decorative masonry wall shall be
constructed along the property line adjacent to a residential zone or any PD
zoning for residential use except that no such wall shall be required if the
property line abuts an alley.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
   (C)   Landscaping. A landscaping plan indicating plant species, initial
size, location, growth characteristics and method of irrigation shall be
approved by the Community Development Director prior to issuance of any permit.
Such required landscaping shall be installed prior to final inspection and
shall be maintained by the property owner. Approval shall be based on the
degree of compliance with landscape standards as adopted from time to time by
the City Council.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 89-22, passed 1-8-90)
   (D)   Trash bins. Fully enclosed trash storage areas shall be provided at
locations that are readily accessible to residents and sanitation collectors.
   (E)   Off-street parking.  Off-street parking shall be provided as required
in
§ 153.184. A circulation plan for all nonresidential uses shall be required for
all new development and shall include truck loading and unloading facilities.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (F)   Site plan review. Proposed buildings shall be subject to site plan
review by the Planning Commission prior to issuance of a building permit. This
review shall include, but not be limited to, comparison of the project with the
Architectural and Subdivision Design Standards as adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL M-2 ZONE
§ 153.135 REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply in all M-2 districts and shall be
subject to the provisions of §§
153.180 through
153.185 of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 10-10-1)
§ 153.136 USES PERMITTED.
   (A)   Any use permitted in §
153.121 (Light Industrial District) shall be permitted in the M-2 zone.
   (B)   Manufacture of alcohol, brick, concrete block, concrete products,
linoleum, oil cloth, terra cotta, and tile.
   (C)   Aircraft factory, blacksmith, boiler works, cotton gin, freight
classification yard, railroad repair shop, and stone mill.
(`67 Code, § 10-10-2)
§ 153.137 USES PERMITTED WITH A USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Airport landing field.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (B)   Automobile dismantling, battery rebuilding, blast furnace, coke oven,
distillation of bones, fat rendering, garbage or dead animal disposal, plastic
processing, poultry and rabbit processing, rock and gravel plant, rubber
processing, slaughtering, smelting, stock yard, tannery, winery, wrecking yard,
unless otherwise specifically allowed.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   (C)   Amusement park, carnival, circus, fairgrounds, open-air church, open-
air theater, and race track and recreation centers.
   (D)   Acetylene gas (manufacture and storage), acid (manufacture and
reclaiming), asphalt (manufacture and refining), foundry and fabricating plant,
gas (manufacture and processing), natural gas processing, oil extracting,
dehydration or reduction facilities, oil mill, petroleum (refining and
storage), potash works, milling mill, tar distillation, wood processing.
   (E)   Borrow pit to a depth of more than three feet.
   (F)   Ceramic products, manufacture of, using previously pulverized clay and
kilns fired only by electricity or low pressure gas.
   (G)   Cleaning (including carpet) and dyeing plant.
   (H)   Draying, freighting and storage when provided with a lock box system
so emergency personnel have access to information regarding materials currently
stored on the property.
   (I)   Dump, refuse disposal, and sewage disposal plant.
   (J)   Feed and fuel (solid) yard.
   (K)   Manufacturing and industrial uses not expressly permitted in
§ 153.136.
   (L)   Manufacture of ammonia, bleaching powder, cameras and photographic
equipment, cement, drugs, explosives (including storage), fertilizer, glue,
gypsum, ice, lamp black, lime, oil shellac, paint, paper, perfumes, petroleum
products, pharmaceutical, plaster of paris, plastic, roofing, soap (including
toilet soap and toiletries), soda and compound, tar products, turpentine, and
varnish.
   (M)   Natural mineral resources, the development of, or exploration for,
together with the necessary buildings, apparatus, or appurtenances incidental
thereto.
   (N)   One dwelling unit if the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The dwelling unit shall be clearly secondary to the commercial use
of the property.
      (2)   There are no other residences on the property.
      (3)   The dwelling unit shall not be rented or leased independent of the
principal use to which it is necessary.
      (4)   The exterior of any residential unit shall be compatible with the
commercial building(s) on the property.
      (5)   The permit shall be reviewed annually to ensure continued
compliance with the provisions of this title.
      (6)   A finding shall be made that other feasible security measures have
been tried and that there is a demonstrated need for additional security.
   (O)   Service stations.
   (P)   Storage of copper, junk, ore paper, rags, scrap, tin, or zinc when
such storage is the primary business.
   (Q)   Tire recapping, rebuilding, retreading.
   (R)   Vocational schools or hospitals when incidental to and located upon
the same property as a commercial or industrial use otherwise permitted in this
district.
   (S)   Warehouse, wholesale building.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (T)   Automobile repair, body work, and steam cleaning subject to the
following restrictions:
      (1)   All work shall be conducted within the building.
      (2)   The area required to meet the off-street parking requirements of
§ 153.184(C) shall not be used to store cars for more than 24 hours.
      (3)   All cars to be stored for more than 24 hours shall be stored within
the building or in a storage area that is surrounded by a six-foot high solid
fence.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
(`67 Code, § 10-10-3)
§ 153.138 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Height limit.
      (1)   No building or structure shall exceed six stories or 70 feet,
whichever is the lesser.
      (2)   No fence, hedge, or screen planting (excluding wire fences, and
nonsolid fences which do not limit visibility as determined by the Community
Development Director) shall be constructed or permitted to grow in excess of
three feet in height within any front yard or side yard of a corner lot.
   (B)   Building site area required.
      (1)   Minimum area - sufficient to provide the minimum yard and parking
requirements.
      (2)   Minimum width, interior lot - 55 feet.
      (3)   Minimum width, corner lot - 65 feet.
      (4)   Minimum depth - 100 feet.
   (C)   Yards and open spaces required.
      (1)   Front yard and side yard of a corner lot - None except no building
shall be closer than ten feet to any street less than 70 feet in width.
      (2)   Side yard, interior lots and rear yard - none except no building
shall be erected closer than 15 feet to any R district.
      (3)   No vehicle opening of a building shall be closer than 20 feet to
the property line or planned right-of-way line towards which the opening faces.
      (4)   Loading docks shall be so located that trucks will head in and head
out and not use the public street for maneuvering, loading and unloading.
(`67 Code, § 10-10-4)
§ 153.139 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Nuisances. No operation shall be conducted on any premises in such a
manner as to cause an unreasonable amount of noise, odor, dust, smoke vibration
or electrical interference detectable off the site.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (B)   Screening. An eight-foot high solid, decorative masonry wall shall be
constructed along the property line adjacent to any residential zone or any PD
zoning for residential use except that no such wall shall be required if the
property line abuts an alley.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
   (C)   Landscaping. A landscaping plan indicating plant species, initial
size, location, growth characteristics and method of irrigation shall be
approved by the Community Development Director prior to issuance of any permit.
Such required landscaping shall be installed prior to final inspection and
shall be maintained by the property owner. Approval shall be based on the
degree of compliance with landscape standards as adopted from time to time by
the City Council.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 89-22, passed 1-8-90)
   (D)   Trash bins. Fully enclosed trash storage areas shall be provided at
locations that are readily accessible to residents and sanitation collectors.
   (E)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as required
in
§ 153.184. A circulation plan for all nonresidential uses shall be required for
all new development and shall include truck loading and unloading facilities.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (F)   Site plan review. Proposed buildings shall be subject to site plan
review by the Planning Commission prior to issuance of a building permit. This
review shall include, but not be limited to, comparison of the project with the
Architectural and Subdivision Design Standards as adopted by the City Council
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
(`67 Code, § 10-10-5)
FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT F ZONE
§ 153.150 REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply in all regulations hereinbefore
specified therefor, and shall be subject to the provisions of §§
153.180 through
153.185 of this chapter. For any district with which is combined an F district,
then in such case the provisions of that subchapter shall govern.
(`67 Code, § 10-11-1)
Cross-reference:
   Flood plain management, see
Chapter 151
§ 153.151 USES PERMITTED.
   All uses permitted in the respective districts with which the F district is
combined, subject to approval of design and location of building provided
however, as follows:
   (A)   Foundation, walls, footing and type of construction shall be of a type
to withstand flood conditions.
   (B)   The main floor levels of all dwelling units shall not be lower than an
elevation established by the Council as the flood plain
(Ord. 82-7, passed 9-27-82)
(`67 Code, § 10-11-2)
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PD ZONE
§ 153.160 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this district is to encourage a desired level of pre-planning
for the development or redevelopment of land and to establish innovative design
solutions while retaining good land use relationships and compatibility with
adjoining property. This district's function is to facilitate the variation of
standards of the zoning code under proper planning and to achieve, where
appropriate, unique and imaginative community design whenever it can be
demonstrated that such variation will result in an environment superior to that
possible under the normal application of city standards.
(`67 Code, § 10-12-1) (Am. Ord. 98-04, passed 7-13-98)
§ 153.161 PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL PD DISTRICTS.
   The following general provisions shall apply to all planned development (PD)
districts:
   (A)   No PD district shall be established on any parcels or a combination of
parcels of less than one acre.
   (B)   The PD district shall be in compliance with the general plan.
   (C)   Each PD district shall be numbered, the first adopted being shown on
the zoning map as PD(1) and each district subsequently adopted being numbered
consecutively.
   (D)   Development of a PD district may proceed by phases. Such phases shall
be reasonable and logical in size, shape and function and in relationship to
other development units within the district. A separate master plan and/or
development plan shall be required for each phase of a development not included
in the original master plan and/or development plan application.
   (E)   All land in a proposed PD district shall be held in one ownership or
under unified control or have the written consent or agreement of all owners of
property proposed for inclusion in the development;
   (F)   The city may initiate a PD district where, in the opinion of the city,
the establishment of such district is in the best interest of the city.
   (G)   The Director of Planning and Community Development may authorize the
review of the master plan and development plan simultaneously.
   (H)   Compliance with any requirement shall not be construed to relieve an
applicant from compliance with subdivision regulations, building code
requirements, or any other applicable regulations of the city.
   (I)   Any change to an approved master plan or development plan shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission and/or City Council for approval prior to
said change going into effect. Minor modifications to the Master Plan or
Development Plan may be approved by the Community Development Director as
authorized by §
153.162(D)(6). Minor modifications considered and approved by the Community
Development Director do not require public notice or hearing.
   (J)   Previously approved planned developments which have since expired and
are established with a PD (#) zone may be processed without a new master plan
but shall be processed in accordance with
§ 153.163.
(`67 Code, § 10-12-2) (Am. Ord. 98-04, passed 7-13-98)
§ 153.162 MASTER PLAN.
   (A)   Initiation of application. An application for a master plan for a PD
district may be initiated by the property owner of record, an authorized agent
or by the city in accordance with the procedures set forth in the city code.
   (B)   Accompanying documents.  An application for a PD district shall be
accompanied by a master plan (maps and explanatory text) for the entire area
and such other material as specified herein. A master plan need not be prepared
when the city initiates the re-zoning to a planned development district.
   (C)   Master plan requirements; planned development (PD) zone district. The
project master plan shall, when required, set forth the following:
      (1)   Location and boundaries for the area proposed for the PD district,
including legal description;
      (2)   Present and approximate proposed topography of the area including
natural features that are to be retained (that is, stands of trees, rock
outcroppings, streams, and the like);
      (3)   General categories of all proposed land uses including, but not
limited to, residential, commercial and professional centers, public buildings,
school sites, recreational facilities and all common open spaces;
      (4)   Proposed densities of all areas indicated for residential
development and coverage for commercial and industrial development;
      (5)   Proposed property development standards as applicable under
§ 153.164.
      (6)   The location and width of all public and private streets and
easements; and
      (7)   General site data, including acreage in total development, total
acreage in each density and land use classification, public facilities, school
site and total acreage devoted to common open space.
   (D)   Review and processing of master plans.  The project master plan shall
be subject to review by the Community Development Department and subsequent
adjudication by the Planning Commission and City Council as follows:
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on such
application and may approve or conditionally approve the master plan (rezone to
PD) if it finds the criteria set forth herein have been satisfied;
      (2)   The Planning Commission may recommend disapproval (rezone to PD) of
the master plan if it finds that any of the criteria have not been satisfied or
that the master plan would be detrimental to the health, safety, convenience or
welfare of the public;
      (3)   The decision and findings of the Planning Commission shall be
forwarded along with the master plan (rezone to PD) to the City Council. The
City Council shall hold a public hearing and either approve, conditionally
approve or disapprove the master plan (rezone to PD). The decision of the City
Council shall be final;
      (4)   Public hearing procedures shall be governed by §§
153.230 through
153.235 of the city code;
      (5)   An application for a PD district master plan shall be accompanied
by a filing fee as established by resolution, from time to time, by the City
Council. The applicant shall also be responsible for all costs associated with
the review of the master plan (rezone to PD) by the City Engineer and other
consultants to the city;
      (6)   An adopted master plan may be modified upon approval by the
Director of Planning and Community Development. Any modification shall be
approved only when, in the opinion of the Director of Planning and Community
Development, such modification is deemed minor in nature; and
      (7)   Where the city initiates the rezone to PD a master plan shall not
be required.
   (E)   Required findings of fact.  The Planning Commission, after a public
hearing, may recommend the establishment of a master plan, PD district, and the
City Council, after a public hearing, may by ordinance establish a PD district,
provided that they find that the acts submitted with the application and
presented at the public hearings confirm the following:
      (1)   Each individual unit of the development if built in stages, as well
as the total development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating
a good environment in the locality and being in any stage as desirable and
stable as the total development;
      (2)   The uses proposed will not be a detriment to the present and
proposed surrounding land uses, but will enhance the desirability of the area
and have a beneficial effect;
      (3)   Any deviation from the standard ordinance requirements is warranted
by the unusual design and additional amenities incorporated in the development
plan which offer certain redeeming features to compensate for any deviations
that may be permitted;
      (4)   The principles incorporated in the proposed master plan identify
unique characteristics which could not otherwise be achieved under the other
zoning districts; and
      (5)   Where a PD rezone is initiated by the previous finds are not
required nor is a master plan required.
(`67 Code, § 10-12-3) (Am. Ord. 98-04, passed 7-13-98)
§ 153.163 DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Application.
      (1)   After the establishment of a PD district (approval of a master
plan, where required), an application for a development plan which is in
conformance with the approved project master plan shall be filed with the
Planning Department and the applicable filing fee paid. The applicant shall
also be responsible for all costs associated with the review of the development
plan by the City Engineer.
      (2)   A development plan application shall be processed in the same
manner as a conditional use permit and submitted to the Planning Commission for
approval. Modifications to previously approved development plans shall be
processed in the same manner as a conditional use permit.
      (3)   Where a master plan is not required and the PD rezone was initiated
by the City, a development plan shall be judged upon its merits in accordance
with the intent of the PD district.
   (B)   Scope of development plan; amendments.
      (1)   A development plan may cover all or a portion of the area included
in the PD district. No building permit shall be issued for any new building or
structure unless a development plan has been approved as specified herein. An
approved development plan may be modified upon approval by the Director of
Planning and Community Development. Such modification shall be approved only
when, in the opinion of the Director of Planning and Community Development,
such modification is deemed minor in nature.
      (2)   Minor modifications may include the addition to existing buildings
which do not exceed 5% of the existing floor area and modifications to signs
where the square footage is not increased more than 10% of the existing square
footage.
      (3)   The Community Development Director may approve other minor
modifications that may include modification to landscape and irrigation plans,
treatment of and design of screening, including fences and re-configuration of
on-site circulation and parking design that may be a benefit to the project.
   (C)   Development plant requirements. The development plan shall set forth
the following and shall be presented in the form as may be required by the
Director of Planning and Community Development:
      (1)   The exact boundaries and legal description of the property to be
developed.
      (2)   All proposed improvements that are to be constructed on the land
and their specific locations, including but not limited to all residential and
nonresidential structures, recreational facilities and typical plans showing
walls, fences, trash areas, streets and walk areas.
      (3)   Common open space showing size, general grades and function upon
completion, where appropriate.
      (4)   The location and dimension of all off-street parking facilities,
public and private.
      (5)   Location and size of all public and quasi-public sites, if
applicable (that is, schools, churches, parks, and the like).
      (6)   A tabulation of the percentage of total building coverage (enclosed
structures) of the development for each land use classification.
      (7)   A tabulation of densities within each project area or sector.
      (8)   Building elevation of the architectural style(s) to be constructed.
Elevations shall identify exterior materials, type of roofing, screening of
mechanical equipment both on the ground and roof-mounted, and color scheme. All
structures shall be designed and oriented for passive energy savings.
      (9)   A schematic landscaping plan indicating the type and size of plant
material to be used and the method of providing permanent maintenance to all
planted areas and open space. This shall include a street tree planting plan in
accordance with
§ 96.03 of the code.
      (10)   If applicable, a subdivision map showing land divisions. The
tentative and final subdivision map shall comply with the State Subdivision Map
Act and Title XV of the city Code with the exception that any permit issued in
conjunction with a tentative subdivision map shall expire no sooner than the
approved tentative map, or any extension hereof.
      (11)   An anticipated development schedule from ground breaking to
occupancy.
      (12)   Optional items such as an economic feasibility study and/or
traffic and noise analysis may be required at the discretion of the Community
Development Director.
   (D)   Design guidelines. The following design guidelines are established for
all PD districts:
      (1)   The overall plan shall achieve a harmonious and integrated
relationship among the land, buildings and uses.
      (2)   Private and common open space, pedestrian and vehicular circulation
facilities, parking facilities, and other pertinent amenities when proposed by
the applicant or required by the city shall be an integral part of the
landscape and particular attention shall be given to the retention of natural
landscape features of the site. When the design consists of single-family
dwellings with private open space, such private open space, fronting public or
private roads and exterior side yards, shall be landscaped.
      (3)   The layout of structures and other facilities which effect a
conservation in street and utility improvements in relationship to other
economic and environmental concerns shall be encouraged.
      (4)   Recreational areas (active and passive) when proposed by the
applicant or required by the city shall be generally dispersed throughout the
development and shall be easily accessible from all residential units within a
PD district.
      (5)   Architectural variety, as well as the establishment of compatible
architectural styles and environmental harmony within the development shall be
attained. All structures shall be designed for passive energy savings.
      (6)   Fencing and screening shall be incorporated into the design of the
project when proposed by the applicant or required by the city.
   (E)   Uses permitted within a development. Uses permitted within a
development shall be those uses permitted by right in the base zone district.
Uses requiring a conditional use permit in the base zone district shall require
Development Plan application submittal and approval.
(`67 Code, § 10-12-4) (Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 98-04, passed 7-13-
98)
§ 153.164 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in a PD district:
   (A)   Lot areas. No provision for individual land uses; however, the total
lot area of the PD district shall not be less than one acre.
   (B)   Lot coverage. In the area covered by the development plan, exclusive
of all dedicated public rights of way, the minimum lot coverage shall be as
approved by the Planning Commission or City Council.
   (C)   Lot dimensions. All lot dimensions shall be as approved by the
Planning Commission or City Council.
   (D)   Setback requirements. All setback requirements shall be as approved by
the Planning Commission or City Council.
   (E)   Distance between buildings. No provisions, except that all buildings
shall be shaped, designed and organized to allow adequate access of persons,
light and air as approved by the Planning Commission or City Council.
   (F)   Building heights. As approved by the Planning Commission or City
Council.
   (G)   Design review and site plan approval. No application is required;
however, approval shall be accomplished through the approval of the conditional
use permit required for the development plan. The Planning Commission or City
Council shall have the approval authority of the architectural style and design
of the development within the PD district. Unless otherwise approved, single-
family roof-mounted heating and air conditioning and other mechanical equipment
must be screened with solid material for a minimum line of sight of 20 feet.
   (H)   Yards, Landscaping, Open Space Requirements.
      (1)   Yards. All front, side and rear yards shall be shown on the
development plan and approved by the Planning Commission depending on the
placement and type of structures.
      (2)   Landscaping.
         (a)   All common open space not utilized for off-street parking shall
be landscaped.
         (b)   A landscaping plan and street tree planting plan, including a
permanent underground irrigation system, which also shows finished grades for
the entire project shall be approved by the Director of Public Works prior to
the issuance of any building permit.
         (c)   All private yards and open space facing or adjacent to a public
or private roadway shall be landscaped and an underground irrigation system
shall be installed prior to occupancy of any unit or building. Such landscape
plan and irrigation system is subject to approval by the Director of Public
Works.
      (3)   Open Space Requirements.
         (a)   Private Open Space. For all ground level dwelling units, a
minimum of 400 square feet of private open space per unit shall be provided.
         (b)   Common Open Space. Where proposed by the applicant or required
by the city, the minimum common open space requirements shall be as follows:
            1.   Single-family units. 35% of the gross designated single-family
area.
            2.   Two-family units. 30% of the gross designated two-family area.
            3.   Three to nine-family units. 25% of the gross designated medium
density multiple-family areas.
            4.   Ten or more units. 20% of the gross designated high density
multiple-family area.
            5.   Commercial/Industrial buildings. As approved by the Planning
Commission or City Council.
   (I)   Fences, hedges, and walls. The type, size and location of all fences,
hedges and walls shall be as shown on the proposed development plan.
   (J)   Off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking requirements and
standards for all uses shall be the same as the requirements specified for the
same or similar uses in §§
153.180 through
153.185 of this chapter.
   (K)   Off-street loading requirements. Off-street loading requirements and
standards shall be the same as those specified for the same or similar uses in
§§
153.180 through
153.185 of this chapter.
   (L) Access.
      (1)   Vehicular access.
         (a)   There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated street or alley
to off-street parking facilities on property requiring off-street parking;
         (b)   All ingress to and egress from public property shall be in a
forward motion, except for single and two-family residences abutting on local
streets.
      (2)   Pedestrian access. There shall be pedestrian access from a private
or dedicated street to property used for residential purposes. A driveway shall
be considered pedestrian access.
   (M)   Signing. Sign restrictions for all uses shall be the same as those
specified for the same or similar uses in §§
153.280 through
153.285 of this chapter.
   (N)   Laundry, clothes drying areas, facilities. For all residential uses,
there shall be provided on the subject lot adequate (as determined by the
Planning Commission) laundry and clothes drying areas and facilities which
shall not be visible from adjacent, adjoining or public property.
   (O)   Solid waste storage, disposal facilities.
      (1)   For all uses, no open storage of solid waste allowed;
      (2)   For all residential uses, each dwelling unit shall have a minimum
of 10 cubic feet of enclosed and concealed trash containers;
      (3)   All other uses determined by the Planning Commission to need solid
waste storage and/or disposal facilities shall provide such facilities
sufficiently concealed from public view.
   (P)   Recreational facilities. Recreational facilities shall be as approved
by the Planning Commission.
   (Q)   Park-in-lieu fees. Park land dedication or in-lieu fees shall be
required of all new residential uses in the PD district, subject to credit for
open space provided as determined by the Community Development Director.
   (R)   Security plan. All multiple-family residential complexes greater than
50 units shall submit a security plan for review and approval by the City
Planning and Sheriff's Department.
   (S)   Security lighting. All multiple-family residential complexes shall
provide security lighting as approved by the City Planning and Sheriff's
Department.
   (T)   Recreational vehicles and trailers. Parking or storage of recreational
vehicles, motor homes, boats or other similar recreational equipment and
trailers within the front yards of interior lots and the front and exterior
side yards of corner lots, including the driveways of said lots, shall be
prohibited. The placement of said recreational equipment when stored within a
permitted side or rear yard shall be screened from adjacent properties.
(`67 Code, § 10-12-5) (Ord. 89-22, passed 1-8-90; Am. Ord. 98-04, passed 7-13-
98)
TINY HOUSE VILLAGES
§ 153.170 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to:
      (1)   Provide development regulations for tiny house villages, which
support a diversity of housing choices to meet a wide variety of housing needs;
      (2)   Encourage creation of more usable space for residents of tiny house
village developments through flexibility in lot standards;
      (3)   Ensure that the overall size, including bulk and mass of tiny house
village structures remains smaller and incurs less visual impact than standard
size single-family dwellings, particularly given allowed intensity of tiny
house village developments;
      (4)   Provide a centrally located and functional common open space area
that fosters a sense of community and a sense of openness in tiny house village
developments;
      (5)   Provide private areas around the individual tiny house dwellings to
enable diversity in landscape design and foster a sense of ownership; and
      (6)   Ensure minimal visual impact from vehicular use and storage areas
for residents of the tiny house village development as well as adjacent
properties, and to maintain a detached single-family character along public
streets.
(Ord. 2023-003, passed 1-24-23)
§ 153.171 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The regulations in this subchapter apply to tiny house village
developments in zones where such uses are permitted.
(Ord. 2023-003, passed 1-24-23)
§ 153.172 DENSITY.
   (A)   The density shall adhere to the density requirements set forth in the
General Plan.
   (B)   The maximum density shall be one tiny house per every 1,800 square
feet of lot area. When calculating the number of units allowed, fractional
units shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
(Ord. 2023-003, passed 1-24-23)
§ 153.173 OCCUPANCY.
   Tiny house village units may not be rented on a transient basis (periods
less than 30 days).
(Ord. 2023-003, passed 1-24-23)
§ 153.174 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Parcel size. The minimum parcel size for one tiny house dwelling shall
be 1,800 square feet and adhere to the following minimum dimensions:
      (1)   Minimum width, interior lot - 30 feet;
      (2)   Minimum width, corner lot - 40 feet; and
      (3)   Minimum depth - 60 feet.
   (B)   Floor area. The total floor area of each tiny house shall not exceed
800 square feet and shall be a minimum size of 150 square feet. Exclusions from
the total floor area calculation:
      (1)   Architectural projections, such as bay windows, fire places or
utility closets no greater then 18 inches in depth;
      (2)   Spaces with ceiling height of five feet or less; and
      (3)   Other exemptions similar in nature provided in the intent of this
title is met and upon approval of the Community Development Director.
   (C)   Lot coverage. No more than 50% of the lot may be covered by buildings.
   (D)   Height. The maximum height shall not exceed 20 feet. Structures with
pitched roofs with a minimum slope of 6:12 may extend up to 30 feet at the
ridge of the roof. Accessory structures will be subject to the height
requirements listed in §
153.033.
   (E)   Yards.
      (1)    Front yard - ten feet.
      (2)   Side yard - four feet.
      (3)   Corner side yard - ten feet.
      (4)   Rear yard - ten feet.
      (5)   Garage - 18 feet.
      (6)   Projections may extend into the required yard distances as follows:
         (a)   Eaves may extend up to 24 inches.
         (b)   Architectural projections, such as bay windows, fireplaces, or
utility closets no greater than 18 inches in depth or six feet in width.
         (c)   Minor appurtenances such as pipes, gas and electrical meters,
alarm systems, air vents and downspouts no greater than 18 inches in depth.
         (d)   HVAC equipment no greater than 24 inches.
         (e)   Exterior stairways. Exterior stairways that provide access to an
upper level are not allowed within the front yard.
      (7)   The minimum separation between buildings shall be consistent with
the city-adopted building code.
   (F)   Fencing. Fence requirements for tiny house villages are listed in §
153.033.
   (G)   Patios and porches.
      (1)   Tiny house units may have a covered porch, or entry at least 60
square feet in size with a minimum depth of six feet and minimum width of eight
feet.
      (2)   Patio or patio railing within the private open space should be
semi-transparent and a maximum height of three feet.
   (H)   Lighting. Common open space areas and access driveways, drive aisles
and off-street parking areas shall be provided with lighting.
   (I)   Off-street parking.
      (1)    The minimum number of parking spaces required for tiny house units
shall be one parking space per dwelling unit, plus one parking space of guest
parking. Guest parking may be in tandem with the off-street parking space for
the tiny house unit.
      (2)   Common parking areas shall be configured in clusters and provided
throughout the tiny house village development. The minimum number of parking
spaces shall be 0.8 parking space per dwelling unit and the common parking area
locations shall be determined by the Community Development Director on a case-
by-case basis.
      (3)   Off-street parking can be located within an accessory structure
such as a carport or garage, such structures shall not be attached to
individual tiny house units. Uncovered parking is also permitted.
   (J)   Design standards.
      (1)   Orientation and building facades. Each building abutting a public
street shall have a minimum of four of the following building elements,
features, and treatments incorporated into the street-facing façade:
         (a)   Windows with visible trim and mullions or recessed windows.
         (b)   Dormers.
         (c)   Bay windows.
         (d)   Entry enhancement such as a well detailed door (multi-panel or
glass insert), window adjacent to front door (sidelite).
         (e)   Variation in roof or building colors and materials, on
individual units, such as brick, stone or other masonry accents.
         (f)   Other building elements, treatments, features, or site designs
approved by the Community Development Director that provide variety and visual
interest.
      (2)   Units that are on the interior of a development should be oriented
toward the common open space or parking areas.
   (K)   Pedestrian connectivity.
      (1)   The pedestrian circulation system shall connect all main entrances
on the site. For tiny house units fronting the street, the public sidewalk may
be used for this standard.
      (2)   Direct pedestrian access should be provided to adjacent, publicly
accessible parks, open space, and trails, transit, rideshare, and bicycle
storage facilities, where feasible.
      (3)   Pedestrian walkways shall be separated from structures by at least
three feet.
      (4)   Pathways in common open space and other shared areas of the
development shall meet Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards.
   (L)   Restrictions. The size of a tiny house dwelling may not be increased
beyond the maximum floor area in §
153.174(B). A deed restriction shall be placed on the property notifying future
property owners of the size restriction.
(Ord. 2023-003, passed 1-24-23)
§ 153.175 LANDSCAPING AND OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   Landscape areas. Landscape areas shall be subject to the landscape
requirements in §
153.033.
   (B)   Common open space. Common open space shall be one or more areas that
are designed and maintained for recreation, gardening, and similar activities
to all residents. Common open space shall total at least 50 square feet per
unit with a minimum area of 300 square feet provided regardless of the number
of units.
   (C)   Private open space. Each residential unit in a tiny house village
development shall have a private open space. Private open space shall be
separate from the common open space to create a sense of separate ownership.
      (1)   Each unit shall be provided with a minimum of 200 square feet of
usable private open space. Private open space may include gardening areas,
patios or porches.
      (2)   No dimension of the private open space shall be less than eight
square feet.
(Ord. 2023-003, passed 1-24-23)
§ 153.176 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   Accessory structures that serve on-site units and are subordinate in use and
scale to the tiny house village development are allowed subject to lot coverage
limitations in §
153.174.
(Ord. 2023-003, passed 1-24-23)
§ 153.177 ARCHITECTURE AND SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Proposals to construct a tiny house village development shall be
subject to an Architecture and Site Plan Review by the Planning Commission
prior to the issuance of a building permit. Architecture and Site Plan Review
entitlements are subject to the provisions in §
153.217 of this chapter.
   (B)   The Community Development Director may allow minor deviations to the
requirements for tiny house village proposals described in §§
153.170 through
153.177, provided that such deviations are consistent with the purposes of this
chapter and subject to Architecture and Site Plan Review by the Planning
Commission.
(Ord. 2023-003, passed 1-24-23)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 153.180 USES.
   (A)   If ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate classification of a
particular use with the meaning and intent of this chapter, or with respect to
matters of height, yard requirements, area requirements or zone boundaries, as
set forth herein and as they pertain to unforeseen circumstances, including
technological changes in processing of materials, it shall be the duty of the
Planning Commission to ascertain all pertinent facts and by resolution set
forth its findings and its interpretations, and therefore such interpretations
shall govern.
   (B)   The provisions of §§
153.180 through
153.185 shall not apply to poles, lines, or other structures or facilities used
or usable by any irrigation district or public utilities company, solely for
the purpose of producing, transmission and/or distribution of electricity,
signal or communication circuits and shall not be construed to limit or
interfere with the installation, maintenance and operation of public utility
pipelines, and electric or telephone transmission lines or railroads when
located in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the Public
Utilities Commission of the State of California within rights-of-way,
easements, franchise, or ownership of such public utilities.
   (C)   Accessory buildings appurtenant to a permitted use shall be allowed
only when constructed concurrent with or subsequent to the main buildings.
(`67 Code, § 10-13-1)
§ 153.181 HEIGHT LIMITS.
   Chimneys, communication towers, mechanical appurtenance, monuments, spires,
campaniles, public and quasi-public buildings may be permitted in excess of
height limits for the various districts, provided, use permit shall first be
obtained in each case. Flag poles are permitted without height limitations and
conventional television antennas, not over 60 feet in height, are permitted in
all districts. Trees in excess of three feet in height are permitted in any
required front yard or side yard of a corner lot, provided that the branches,
at maturity, are not closer than eight feet to the ground.
(`67 Code, § 10-13-2)
§ 153.182 BUILDING SITE AREA.
   Lots of less than the minimum required area, width, or depth in any district
which are of record at the time of adoption of the code, such lot shall be
deemed to have complied with the minimum required lot area, width and depth as
set forth in any such district or precise plan. On any substandard lot the
minimum yard requirements of the district in which it is located still apply.
(`67 Code, § 10-13-3)
§ 153.183 YARDS.
   (A)   For the purpose of computing front yard dimensions the measurements
shall be taken from the nearest point of the front wall of the building to the
street line, provided, however, that if an official plan line has been
established for the street, the measurement shall be taken from the point of
building to such official plan line, except that certain architectural features
hereinafter shall not be considered in making such measurements, to wit:
      (1)   Cornices, canopies, coves, or other architectural features may
extend into any required yard a distance not to exceed three feet.
      (2)   Fire escapes, landing places and uncovered porches may extend into
the required yard a distance not to exceed six feet but in no case may they be
so located that access to the rear of the property is impaired.
      (3)   Solid fences, hedges and screen planting not to exceed three feet
in height may extend to the property line in the front yard.
      (4)   Solid fences, hedges, and screen planting may be established or
permitted to grow in any side or rear yard to the height allowed in the zoning
district in which the property is located.
      (5)   Fireplaces may extend into any required yard a distance not to
exceed two feet.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the minimum front and side yard requirements for the
various districts, as provided in this chapter, no structure (excluding,
however, open wire fences, electroliers without attached advertising signs,
utility poles, solid fences or screen planting not more than three feet in
height, and trees in excess of three feet in height, provided that the branches
at maturity are not closer than eight feet to the ground) shall be located
closer to the highway center line than as indicated, on the following specified
highways:
      (1)   Patterson Road, from the westerly city limits to its intersection
with Callander Avenue: 75 feet. The right-of-way on the section of Patterson
Road shall be 110 feet.
      (2)   Callander Avenue, from its intersection with Patterson Road to its
intersection with Atchison Street: 70 feet. The right-of-way on the section of
Callander Avenue shall be 100 feet.
      (3)   Claus Road: 70 feet. The right-of-way for Claus Road shall be 50
feet. Where a specific plan line has been established it shall be used as the
ultimate right-of-way.
      (4)   That portion of Roselle Avenue which is presently in the city
limits: 53 feet. The right-of-way for the portion of Roselle Avenue which is
now in the city limits shall be 66 feet. The HIGHWAY CENTER LINE, as that
phrase is used in this subsection, refers to the following described center
line:
   COMMENCING at the quarter section corner common to Section 25 and Section
26, Township 2 South, Range 11 East, Mount Diablo Meridian, thence easterly
along the center line of Patterson Road, a distance of three feet to the
proposed center line of Roselle Avenue, the point being the true point of
beginning of this description.
   Thence South 0° 12' West parallel to and 3 feet at right angles to the
westerly line of Section 25 a distance of 1854.00 feet more or less to the
existing city limits (1974) of the city.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (C)   No mechanical equipment, including pool equipment, that is permanently
fixed shall be permitted to occupy any of the required setback areas.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   (D)   Minimum setbacks for multi-family buildings, commercial uses and
industrial uses shall be as follows:
      (1)   The minimum setback of a building adjacent to a public right-of-way
shall be 15 feet and shall be determined by a 60° vertical angle beginning at
the edge of the right-of-way and extending onto the property, as illustrated in
the following table.
      (2)   The minimum setback of a building from a property line shall be 15
feet and shall be determined by a 60° vertical angle beginning at the property
line and extending onto the property, as illustrated in the following table.
      (3)   The minimum setback of a building adjacent to residential districts
shall be 25 feet and shall be determined by a 60° vertical angle beginning at
the property line and extending onto the property, as illustrated in the
following table. In determining the height of the building for the purpose of
this section, the level of the ground shall be deemed to be the level of the
ground of the adjacent residential district. (Please note that additional
setbacks are required for the height of the building when adjacent to
residential areas.)
MINIMUM SETBACKS
BASED ON 60-DEGREE ANGLE
(in feet)
                Minimum Setback
Building Height Minimum Setback When Adjacent to Residential Zone
MINIMUM SETBACKS
BASED ON 60-DEGREE ANGLE
(in feet)
                Minimum Setback
Building Height Minimum Setback When Adjacent to Residential Zone
0-25            15.0            25.0
26              15.5            25.5
27              16.0            26.0
28              16.5            26.5
29              17.0            27.0
30              18.0            28.0
31              18.5            28.5
32              19.0            29.0
33              19.5            29.5
34              20.0            30.0
35              20.5            30.5
36              21.0            31.0
37              22.0            32.0
38              22.5            32.5
39              23.0            33.0
40              23.5            33.5
41              24.0            34.0
42              24.5            34.5
43              25.0            35.0
44              26.0            36.0
45              26.5            36.5
46              27.0            37.0
47              28.0            38.0
48              28.5            38.5
   
MINIMUM SETBACKS
BASED ON 60-DEGREE ANGLE
(in feet)
                Minimum Setback
Building Height Minimum Setback When Adjacent to Residential Zone
MINIMUM SETBACKS
BASED ON 60-DEGREE ANGLE
(in feet)
                Minimum Setback
Building Height Minimum Setback When Adjacent to Residential Zone
49              29.0            39.0
50              30.0            40.0
51              30.5            40.5
52              31.0            41.0
53              31.5            41.5
54              32.0            42.0
55              33.0            43.0
56              33.5            43.5
57              34.0            44.0
58              34.5            44.5
59              35.0            45.0
60              36.0            46.0
(`67 Code, § 10-13-4) (Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
§ 153.184 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Churches, lodges, and places of public assembly. One space for every
three fixed seats, or for every three persons allowed under the maximum
capacity established by the Fire Warden where there are no fixed seats, in the
main place of assembly.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
   (B)   Dwellings.
      (1)   Single-family and manufactured housing, financed by FmHA, one one-
car garage of the maximum size permitted by FmHA and one additional off-street
parking space which may be located adjacent to the driveway.
      (2)   Single-family dwelling and manufactured housing, a two-car garage,
with a minimum clear width of 18 feet and a clear depth of 19 feet six inches
in the direction of travel, must be provided. No appliances or other objects
may intrude into the garage space area.
      (3)   Single-family dwelling built prior to January 1, 1990, one one-car
garage may be constructed if there is inadequate area for a two-car garage.
This provision would not apply to garage conversions or other requirements of
this section.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 12-14-92)
      (4)   Two-family dwelling, duplex or multiple dwelling: may be covered or
uncovered.
         (a)   Zero to one bedroom – one onsite parking space;
         (b)   Two to three bedrooms – one and one half onsite parking spaces;
and
         (c)   Four or more bedrooms – two and one half onsite parking spaces.
      (5)   Rooming or boarding house: one space for every 300 square feet of
ground floor area. Spaces inside a garage may be counted toward meeting the
requirement.
(Ord. 2000-05, passed 4-24-00)
   (C)   Garage and repair shops. One space for every 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
(Ord. 88-14, passed 11-28-88)
   (D)   Hospital. One and one-half spaces for each bed.
   (E)   Manufacturing or assembly plants and wholesale warehouses. One space
for each employee on a maximum shift plus three additional spaces or, when the
number of employees cannot be determined, one space for every 300 square feet
of gross floor area.
   (F)   Mobile home parks. Two spaces for each mobile home space plus one
visitor parking space for every five mobile home spaces. Excluding visitor
parking, the spaces may be constructed in tandem.
   (G)   Mortuaries. One space for every five seats, or one space for every 35
square feet in assembly rooms where seating is not fixed.
   (H)   Motels and hotels. One space for each sleeping room or dwelling unit.
   (I)   Office buildings.
      (1)   Banks and financial institutions. One space for every 300 square
feet of gross floor area.
      (2)   General business and professional offices. One space for every 300
square feet of gross floor area.
      (3)   Medical-dental offices and clinics. One space per doctor and each
employee, plus one space per individual examining room or one space for every
100 square feet of gross floor area where the number of examining rooms is
unknown.
   (J)   Recreational uses.
      (1)   Bowling alleys. Five spaces per lane.
      (2)   Dance hall and amusement centers. Twenty five spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area.
      (3)   Stadiums and theaters. One space for every three seats.
   (K)   Restaurants and bars. One space per three seats plus any additional
spaces as prescribed by the Community Development Director. This division is
subject to appeal to the City Council and Planning Commission.
   (L)   Rest home or nursing home. One space for each employee on a maximum
shift plus one space for every eight beds.
   (M)   Retail stores and service establishments.
      (1)   Community and regional shopping center. Eight spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area and one off-street truck unloading space for
each 7,500 square feet of gross floor area.
      (2)   Flea markets. Eight spaces per 1,000 square feet of indoor or
outdoor sales area.
      (3)   Vehicles sales establishment. One space for each employee on a
maximum shift plus one customer parking space per every 20 vehicles for sale.
      (4)   All other retail store and service establishments. One space for
every 300 square feet of gross floor area and one off-street truck unloading
space for each 7,500 square feet of gross floor area.
   (N)   Schools.
      (1)   Elementary. Two paces for each classroom.
      (2)   High school and trade school. One space for every five seats.
      (3)   Colleges. One space for every three seats.
   (O)   Combined uses. The number of required spaces shall be determined by
combining individual requirements for each use.
   (P)   Other uses. All other uses not set forth above shall be determined by
the Planning Commission based on the intensity of use by motor vehicles.
   (Q)   Location. No required off-street parking spaces shall be located
within the building setback area or any required yard space, nor shall the
spaces be allowed in tandem.
   (R)   Commercial spaces. All commercial and other parking spaces shall be
located within 300 feet of the use which they are to serve.
   (S)   Existing buildings. None of the off-street parking requirements shall
apply to any building in existence at the time of the effective date of this
chapter, provided that changes in use of the building do not increase demand
for spaces and provided that any portion of the premises being used for off-
street parking in connection with any such building shall not be reduced below
the requirements of this section.
   (T)   Paving and marking. All required parking spaces shall be paved and,
with the exception of spaces provided in a garage, all spaces shall be marked.
   (U)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles, as described in this
chapter, may be parked on private property within any zoning district within
the city so long as they do not create safety or sight clearance hazard for
traffic on abutting streets, sidewalks or alleys and shall not be stored within
the front yard area, excluding driveways.
      (1)   Residents may apply and be issued (no fee) permits, by officers of
the Riverbank Police Services Division, for guests to stay in recreation
vehicles parked on their property for a period not to exceed seven consecutive
days. Written permission of the property owner of record is required prior to
issuance of a temporary permit.
      (2)   Recreation vehicles, parked on private property, are prohibited
from being used as living quarters except as provided above or when parked in
approved licensed recreation vehicle parks.
   (V)   Access. All parking spaces shall be accessible by paved driveways,
alleys, or streets. If parking spaces are to be entered or exited by means of
an alley, the alley shall be paved the entire width of the lot and from the lot
to the nearest paved, public right-of-way.
(‘67 Code, § 10-13-15) (Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87; Am. Ord. 2002-006, passed
8-26-02; Am. Res. 2003-019, passed 2-24-03; Am. Ord. 2017-010, passed 10-24-17)
§ 153.185 AFFORDABLE HOUSING DENSITY BONUS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the affordable housing density bonus is to:
      (1)   Establish procedures and criteria for use in the consideration of
density bonuses for lower income housing development as defined in Section
65915 of the California Government Code;
      (2)   Establish procedures for requesting developer incentives or
concessions for the production of housing units and child care facilities as
prescribed in Section 65915 of the California Government Code; and
      (3)   Provide a significant contribution to the economic feasibility of
lower income housing in proposed housing developments.
   (B)   General provisions. The criteria and procedures set forth in Section
65915 of the California Government Code shall be applied to requests for
density bonuses for affordable housing unless amended in this section.
   (C)   Application procedures. The application for a density bonus, incentive
or concession shall be submitted with the first application for approval of a
housing development and shall be processed concurrently with any other planning
permit required for the housing development. The application shall be submitted
on form and contain such information and support data as prescribed by the
Community Development Director. The application shall contain sufficient
information to make the required determinations and findings defined in Section
65915 of the California Government Code.
   (D)   Fees. The City Council shall set for the amount of the fees for the
application required and authorized in this section.
(Ord. 2015-003, passed 2-24-15)
NONCONFORMING USES
§ 153.195 USE OF LAND.
   The lawful use of land existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
although such use does not conform to the regulations herein specified for the
district in which such land is located, may be continued, provided that no such
use shall be enlarged or increased, nor be extended to occupy a greater area
than that occupied by such use at the time of the adoption of this title, and
shall be in conformity to the regulations specified for the district in which
such land is located, provided, however, that a building or structure occupied
by a nonconforming use or building or structure nonconforming as to height
area, or yard regulations may be added to or enlarged, remodeled or moved to a
new location on the lot only upon a permit authorized by the Planning
Commission, which may issue such permit provided that the Commission, after a
public hearing, shall find:
   (A)   The proposed change does not impose any unreasonable burden upon the
lands located in the vicinity of the nonconforming use or structure.
   (B)   Will not under the circumstances of the particular case be detrimental
to the health, safety, and general welfare of people in the area or the city in
general.
   (C)   Is logically and reasonably related to the existing use and that the
size and/or intensity of the enlargement, expansion, restoration or change is
not such that it would more appropriately be moved to a zone district in which
it is permitted.
(`67 Code, § 10-14-1)
§ 153.196 USE NOT CONFORMING.
   The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the adoption of this
chapter may be continued although such use does not conform to the regulations
specified for the district in which such building is located.
(`67 Code, § 10-14-2)
§ 153.197 USE PERMIT.
   The nonconforming use of a property may be extended as described in
§ 153.195 provided a use permit is approved.
(`67 Code, § 10-14-3)
§ 153.198 USE OF RESTRICTED NATURE.
   The nonconforming use of a building may be changed to a use of the same or
more restricted nature provided that in each case a use permit is first
obtained.
(`67 Code, § 10-14-4)
§ 153.199 ABANDONMENT.
   If the nonconforming use of a building or land ceases for a continuous
period of six months, it shall be considered abandoned and shall therefore be
used only in accordance with the regulations for the district in which it is
located.
(`67 Code, § 10-14-5)
§ 153.200 DAMAGED BUILDING.
   A nonconforming building damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, earthquake
or other act to an extent of more than 75% of the appraised value thereof,
according to either the assessor's records or an appraisal performed by a
qualified real estate appraiser may be restored only if made to conform to all
the regulations of the district in which it is located, provided that such
building may be restored to a floor area not exceeding that of the former
building if a use permit first shall be secured.
(`67 Code, § 10-14-6)
§ 153.201 REPAIR, ALTERATIONS.
   Ordinary maintenance and repairs may be made to any nonconforming building
provided no structural alterations are made and providing that such work does
not exceed 15% of the appraised value in any one-year period. Other repairs or
alterations may be permitted provided that a use permit shall first be secured
in each case.
(`67 Code, § 10-14-7)
§ 153.202 INTERPRETATION.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in
the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a building
permit has been properly issued, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter then effective, and of this chapter, provided that in all such cases
actual construction shall be diligently carried on until completion of the
building.
(`67 Code, § 10-14-8)
§ 153.203 MINOR EXPANSION.
   Expansion of a legal nonconforming single-family dwelling or duplex by not
more than 25% of the floor area of the existing dwelling(s) shall be permitted
with the approval of the Community Development Director. Such expansion shall
meet all other requirements of the city code and shall not result in the
creation of more dwelling units than currently occupies the property.
(`67 Code, § 10-14-9) (Ord. 87-11, passed 7-27-87)
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
§ 153.210 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide administrative and legislative
procedures for the review of plans, the processing and review of applications
for consideration and relief under this chapter, and for appeal procedures with
respect to Community Development Director and Planning Commission
determinations.
(Ord. 2022-002, passed 4-26-22)
§ 153.211 PERMITS - GENERAL.
   Application for any permit, variance, appeal, zoning ordinance amendment or
other entitlement provided by this chapter shall be prepared and submitted by
the applicant, shall be processed by the city, and shall be reviewed by the
appropriate body or person pursuant to this chapter and the more specific
provisions set forth in subsequent sections for the specific entitlement.
(Ord. 2022-002, passed 4-26-22)
§ 153.212 APPLICATION.
   Application for any permit, variance, appeal, or other entitlement provided
by this chapter and considered by the city, shall be made on a form prescribed
by the city and signed by the applicant and the owner of the affected property
or authorized agent and shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed by a
separate city ordinance.
(Ord. 2022-002, passed 4-26-22)
§ 153.213 SUPPORTING INFORMATION.
   Applications to be considered by the city shall be accompanied by the
following supporting information as may be applicable:
   (A)   A legal description of the property (required);
   (B)   A location map showing the project site and the general vicinity of
the site (required);
   (C)   A completed environmental information form as prescribed by the city
in its CEQA Guidelines (required);
   (D)   Site plans, elevations plans, floor plans, and other maps and data as
may be necessary to describe the existing conditions on and surrounding the
property and the proposed plans for the future development of the property. The
Planning Commission shall by resolution maintain a listing of the minimum
documentation necessary for submittal in support of each type of application;
   (E)   Such other information specified in this title for the particular
entitlement requested.
(Ord. 2022-002, passed 4-26-22)
§ 153.214 REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Upon submittal to the city, applications shall be processed in
accordance with the following:
      (1)   Preliminary review. Within 30 days following initial submittal of
an application the following actions shall be taken by the Community
Development Director or his or her designee:
         (a)   A determination shall be made as to whether the application is
in order and complete pursuant to city requirements and CEQA Guidelines.
         (b)   If the application is determined to be not in order or complete
the applicant shall be notified of the deficiencies in application and/or
specific data necessary to make it complete.
         (c)   At such time as the application is determined to be complete,
the applicant shall be notified.
   (B)   CEQA. Following certification that an application is complete the city
shall review the proposal conducting any studies necessary for its property
consideration and causing the preparation of reports for the reviewing body
including any prerequisite environmental documents.
   (C)   Final review and action.
      (1)   If the matter is one requiring a public hearing, a public hearing
date shall be set and advertised pursuant to §
153.215.
      (2)   If the matter is one allowing the Community Development Director or
his or her designee action, the matter shall be reviewed and action shall be
taken.
      (3)   If the matter is one requiring Planning Commission action or
recommendation to the City Council, the matter will be forwarded to the
Planning Commission for their review and action or recommendation.
      (4)   If the matter is one requiring City Council action, the matter will
be forwarded to the City Council for their review and action.
(Ord. 2022-002, passed 4-26-22)
§ 153.215 PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE.
   (A)   Whenever the provisions of this title state that a public hearing
shall be held, a public hearing notice shall be given pursuant to Cal. Gov’t
Code § 65091.
   (B)   All mailing or publication shall be accomplished at least ten days
prior to the public hearing.
   (C)   The failure of any person to receive notice required by this section,
shall not affect the authority of the city to act on a matter before it,
provided proper notice has been found to be given.
(Ord. 2022-002, passed 4-26-22)
§ 153.216 USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Purpose. Use permits may be issued for any of the uses or purposes for
which such permits are required and are subject to the provisions of this
section.
   (B)   Form. Applications for a use permit shall be made to the Planning
Commission in writing on a form prescribed by the Commission and shall be
accompanied by sufficient information in writing, drawings or pictures to show
the detail of the proposed use or building(s). Applications for a use permit
shall provide evidence to support the approval findings pursuant to §
153.216(D). A filing fee in such amount as may be fixed by the City Council
shall be paid at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   Public hearing. The Planning Commission shall give notice and hold a
public hearing on each application for a use permit in accordance with the
provisions of §
153.215.
   (D)   Approval findings. The Planning Commission shall make the following
findings to approve a use permit application:
      (1)   The proposed use is consistent with the general plan, any
applicable specific plan, and all applicable provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the use applied for
will not, under the circumstances of the particular case (location, size,
design, and operating characteristics), be detrimental to the health, safety,
and general welfare of the persons residing or working in the neighborhood or
to the general welfare of the city;
      (3)   The proposed use is consistent with the purpose of the applicable
zoning district or districts;
      (4)   The proposed use meets the minimum requirements of this title
applicable to the use and complies with all other applicable laws, ordinances,
and regulations of the city and state.
   (E)   Conditions. The Planning Commission may designate such conditions in
connection with the use permit as it deems necessary to secure the purpose of
this title and may require such guarantees and evidence that such conditions
are being or will be complied with.
   (F)   Denial. In cases where any use permit is refused, the Planning
Commission shall state its reasons for such refusal.
   (G)   Appeal. Appeal of the Planning Commission's action on the request for
a use permit shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in §
153.219.
   (H)   Effect. Use permit shall not become effective for ten days after being
granted and in the event an appeal is filed, shall not become effective until a
decision is made by the Council on such appeal.
      (1)   No building or zoning permit shall be issued in any case where a
use permit is required by the provisions of this title unless and until such
use permit has been granted by the Planning Commission or Council and then only
in accordance with the terms and conditions of the use permit granted.
      (2)   No application for a use permit which has been denied shall be
resubmitted for a period of one year from the date the order of denial became
final, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of project
conditions found to be valid by the Planning Commission or City Council,
whichever issued the order of denial.
      (3)   Any use permit granted shall be null and void 24 months from the
date of final approval thereof unless prior to such expiration date, the
property is being used for the purpose of which the use permit was granted or
unless a valid building permit is in effect for the construction of necessary
buildings or appurtenances to such use. The Planning Commission may defer
expiration of the permit for a period not exceeding one year upon application,
in writing, by the owner of the property prior to expiration provided such use
is still permitted in the district in which it is proposed to be located.
(Ord. 82-7, passed 9-27-82; Ord. 89-22, passed 1-8-90; Am. Ord. 2022-002,
passed 4-26-22)
§ 153.217 ARCHITECTURE AND SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to allow architecture and
site plan review of all developments, buildings, structures and other
facilities constructed or modified in any zone where architecture and site plan
review is required in order to foster a good design character through
consideration of aesthetic and functional relationships to surrounding
development, and in order to further enhance the city's appearance, and the
livability and usefulness of properties.
   (B)   Form. Applications for an architecture and site plan review permit
shall be made to the Planning Commission on a form prescribed by the Planning
Commission and shall be accompanied by sufficient information in writing,
drawings, or pictures to show the detail of the proposed building(s).
Applications for an architecture and site plan review permit shall provide
evidence to support the approval findings pursuant to §
153.217(D). A filing fee in such amount as may be fixed by the City Council
shall be paid at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   Public hearing. The Planning Commission shall give notice and hold a
public hearing on each application it receives for architecture and site plan
review in accordance with the provisions of §
153.215.
   (D)   Approval findings. The Planning Commission shall make the following
findings to approve an architecture and site plan review application:
      (1)   The proposed project is consistent with the objectives of the
general plan, complies with applicable zoning regulations, planned development,
master plan or specific plan provisions, improvement standards, and other
applicable standards and regulations adopted by the city.
      (2)   The proposed project will not create conflicts with vehicular,
bicycle, or pedestrian transportation modes of circulation.
      (3)   The site layout (orientation and placement of buildings and parking
areas), as well as the landscaping, lighting, and other development features,
is compatible with and compliments the existing surrounding environment and
ultimate character of the area under the general plan.
      (4)   The proposed architecture, including the character, scale, and
quality of the design, relationship with the site and other buildings, building
materials, colors, screening of exterior appurtenances, exterior lighting, and
similar elements, establishes a clear design concept and is compatible with the
character of the buildings on adjoining and nearby properties.
   (E)   Conditions. The Planning Commission may designate such conditions in
connection with the architecture and site plan review as it deems necessary to
secure the purpose of this title and may require such guarantees and evidence
that such conditions are being or will be complied with.
   (F)   Appeal. Appeal of the Planning Commission's action on the request for
an architecture and site plan review shall be made in accordance with the
procedures specified in §
153.219.
   (G)   Effect. The architecture and site plan review shall not become
effective for ten days after being granted and in the event an appeal is filed,
shall not become effective until a decision is made by the Council on such
appeal.
      (1)   No building or zoning permit shall be issued in any case where an
architecture and site plan review application is required by the provisions of
this title unless and until such permit has been granted by the Planning
Commission, or City Council and then only in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the architecture and site plan review permit granted.
      (2)   No application for an architecture and site plan review application
which has been denied shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the
date the order of denial became final, except on grounds of new evidence or
proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the Planning Commission or
City Council, whichever issued the order of denial.
      (3)   Any architecture and site plan review granted shall be null and
void 24 months from the date of final approval thereof unless prior to such
expiration date, a valid building permit is in effect for the construction of
necessary buildings or appurtenances of the review. The Planning Commission may
defer expiration of the permit for a period not exceeding one year upon
application, in writing, by the owner of the property prior to expiration
provided such use is still permitted in the district in which it is proposed to
be located.
(Ord. 2022-002, passed 4-26-22)
§ 153.218 VARIANCE.
   (A)   Purpose. Each zoning district has specific development standards and a
variance is a special request for the city to waive or alter one or more of
those standards. When practical difficulties, unnecessary hardship and outcomes
inconsistent with the general purpose of this title result from the strict
application of certain provisions thereof, a variance may be granted as
provided in this section except for uses not permitted by zoning district
regulations.
   (B)   Form. An application for variance shall be made in writing on a form
prescribed by the city and shall be accompanied by a filing fee (that is
subject to change by City Council resolution). Applications for a variance
shall provide evidence to support the approval findings pursuant to §
153.218(D).
   (C)   Public hearing. The Planning Commission shall give notice and hold a
public hearing on each application for a variance in accordance with the
provisions of §
153.215.
   (D)   Approval findings. The Planning Commission shall make the following
findings to approve a variance application:
      (1)   Because of special circumstances applicable to the property
including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict
application of the zoning ordinance deprives the subject property of the
privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone
classifications.
      (2)   The granting of the application is necessary for the preservation
and enjoyment of substantial property rights of the petitioner and will not
constitute a grant of special privileges.
      (3)   The granting of such application will not, under the circumstances
of the particular case, materially adversely affect the health or safety of
persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the property of the
applicant and will not, under the circumstances of the particular case be
materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or
improvements in said neighborhood.
   (E)   Conditions. The Planning Commission may impose such conditions in
connection with a variance as it deems necessary to secure the purposes of this
chapter and may require a bond guarantee or other assurances that such
conditions are being or will be complied with.
   (F)   Appeal. Appeal of the Planning Commission's action on the request for
a variance shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in §
153.219.
   (G)   Effect.
      (1)   The variance shall not become effective for ten days after being
granted and in the event an appeal is filed, shall not become effective until a
decision is made by the Council on such appeal.
      (2)   No application for a variance which has been denied shall be
resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial
became final, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of
conditions found to be valid by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Any variance granted shall be null and void 12 months from the date
of final approval thereof unless prior to such expiration date, the property is
being used as stated in the variance, or unless a valid building permit is in
effect for the construction of buildings or appurtenances to such variance. The
Planning Commission may defer expiration of the variance for a period not
exceeding one year upon receiving an application, in writing, by the owner of
the property prior to expiration provided the conditions for granting the
variance have not changed.
      (4)   The Planning Commission may revoke or modify the approval of a
variance as indicated in §
153.247.
(Ord. 2016-003, passed 4-26-16; Am. Ord. 2022-002, passed 4-26-22)
§ 153.219 APPEALS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to prescribe the procedure
through which an appeal may be made in case an interested person is
dissatisfied with any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination, or
disapproval, made in an administration, interpretation, or enforcement of this
chapter.
   (B)   Approval authority. The following table identifies the approving
authority for each entitlement:
Entitlement Approving Authority
            Community Development Director Planning Commission
Entitlement                  Approving Authority
                             Community Development Director Planning Commission
Use permit                                                  X
Architecture and site plan                                  X
review
Variance                                                    X
Home occupation              X
Sign permit                  X
Determination of similar use X
 
   (C)   Appeal authority. Any person dissatisfied with a determination or
action of the Community Development Director or Planning Commission made
pursuant to this chapter may appeal such action to the designated appeal
authority listed in the table below, within ten days from the date of the
action. Actions by City Council are final, and no further administrative
appeals are available.
 
Approving Authority for Action Being Appealed Appeal Authority
                                              Planning Commission City Council
Community Development Director                X
Planning Commission                                               X
 
   (D)   Form. All appeals shall be submitted in writing, identifying the
determination or action being appealed and specifically stating the basis or
grounds of the appeal. Appeals shall be filed within ten days from, but not
including, the date of the determination or action for which an appeal is made,
accompanied by a filing fee established by City Council resolution, and
submitted to the Community Development Director. The time limit will extend to
the following business day where the last of the specified number of days falls
on a day that the city is not open for business. The filing of an appeal shall
stay the issuance of any necessary subsequent permit(s) associated with any
right or entitlement that will be subject to the appeal.
      (1)   Appeal of the Community Development Director decision. The
applicant or any other person aggrieved may appeal such decision by filing a
written notice with the Community Development Director prior to the time the
decision becomes final. The Community Development Director shall furnish forms
of notice of appeal.
      (2)   Appeal of Planning Commission decision. The applicant or any other
person aggrieved may appeal such decision by filing a written notice of appeal
with the Community Development Director prior to the time the decision becomes
final.
   (E)   Public hearing. Unless otherwise agreed upon by the person filing the
appeal and the applicant, appeal hearings should be conducted within 60 days
from the date of appeal submittal. Notice of the appeal shall be provided
pursuant to noticing requirements consistent with state law.
   (F)   Appeal hearing and action. Each appeal shall be considered a de novo
(new) hearing. In taking its action on an appeal, the appeal authority shall
state the basis for its action. Only such evidence and plans as were submitted
to and ruled upon the approving authority may be provided to the appeal
authority for review. The appeal authority may act to confirm, modify, or
reverse the action of the approving authority, in whole or in part, or add or
amend such conditions as deemed necessary. The action of the appeal authority
is final on the date of decision and, unless expressly provided by this title,
may not be further appealed.
(Ord. 2016-003, passed 4-26-16; Am. Ord. 2022-002, passed 4-26-22)
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
§ 153.221 PURPOSE.
   It is the policy of the city, pursuant to the federal Fair Housing
Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, to
provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules,
policies, practices and procedures to ensure equal access to housing and
facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. This
ordinance establishes a procedure for making requests for reasonable
accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices
and procedures of the jurisdiction to comply fully with the intent and purpose
of fair housing laws.
(Ord. 2015-004, passed 2-24-15)
§ 153.222 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Reasonable accommodation in the land use and zoning context means
providing individuals with disabilities or developers of housing for people
with disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use and zoning and
building regulations, policies, practices and procedures, or even waiving
certain requirements, when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing
opportunities.
   (B)   An individual with a disability is someone who has a physical or
mental impairment that limits one or more major life activities; anyone who is
regarded as having such impairment; or anyone with a record of such impairment.
   (C)   A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any individual
with a disability, his or her representative, or a developer or provider of
housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of a land use,
zoning or building regulation, policy, practice or procedure acts as a barrier
to fair housing opportunities.
(Ord. 2015-004, passed 2-24-15)
§ 153.223 NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC OF AVAILABILITY OF ACCOMMODATION PROCESS.
   Notice of the availability of reasonable accommodation shall be prominently
displayed at public information counter in the development services department,
advising the public of the availability of the procedure for eligible
individuals. Forms for requesting reasonable accommodation shall be available
to the public in the development services department.
(Ord. 2015-004, passed 2-24-15)
§ 153.224 REQUESTING REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION.
   (A)   In order to make housing available to an individual with a disability,
any eligible person as defined in § 153.226 may request a reasonable
accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices
and procedures.
   (B)   Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be in writing and provide
the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the individual(s) requesting reasonable
accommodation;
      (2)   Name and address of the property owner(s);
      (3)   Address of the property for which accommodation is requested;
      (4)   Description of the requested accommodation and regulation(s),
policy or procedure for which accommodation is sought; and
      (5)   Reason that the requested accommodation may be necessary for the
individual(s) with the disability to use and enjoy the dwelling.
   (C)   Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be
retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and
shall not be made available for public inspection.
   (D)   A request for reasonable accommodation in regulations, policies,
practices, and procedures may be filed at any time that the accommodation may
be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable accommodation does
not affect an individual's obligations to comply with other applicable
regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation.
   (E)   If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable
accommodation, the City of Riverbank will provide assistance to ensure that the
process is accessible.
(Ord. 2015-004, passed 2-24-15)
§ 153.225 REVIEWING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the
Community Development Director, using the criteria set for in § 153.226.
   (B)   The Community Development Director shall issue a written decision on a
request for reasonable accommodation within 30 days of the date of the
application and may either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request
for reasonable accommodation in accordance with the required findings set for
in § 153.226.
   (C)   If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable
accommodation, the Community Development Director may request further
information from the applicant consistent with fair housing laws, specifying in
detail the information that is required. In the event that a request for
additional information is made, the 30 day period to issue a decision is stayed
until the applicant responds to the request.
(Ord. 2015-004, passed 2-24-15)
§ 153.226 REQUIRED FINDINGS.
   The written decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request
for reasonable accommodation shall be consistent with fair housing laws and
based on the following factors:
   (A)   Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request for
reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual with disabilities, as
defined and protected under federal and state fair housing laws;
   (B)   Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make housing
available to an individual with disabilities protected under the fair housing
laws;
   (C)   Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or
administrative burden on the city; and
   (D)   Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental
alteration in the nature of the city's land use and zoning or building program.
(Ord. 2015-004, passed 2-24-15)
§ 153.227 WRITTEN DECISION ON THE REQUEST FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION.
   (A)   The written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation shall
explain in detail the basis of the decision, including the Community
Development Director's findings on the criteria set forth in §
153.226. All written decisions shall give notice of the applicant's right to
appeal and to request reasonable accommodation in the appeals process as set
forth below. The notice of decision shall be sent to the applicant by certified
mail.
   (B)   The written decision of the Community Development Director shall be
final unless an applicant appeals it to the Planning Commission.
   (C)   If the reviewing authority fails to render a written decision on the
request for reasonable accommodation within the 30 day time period allotted by
§
153.226 the request shall be deemed granted.
   (D)   While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and
regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the
request shall remain the full force and effect.
(Ord. 2015-004, passed 2-24-15)
§ 153.228 APPEALS.
   (A)   Within 30 days of the date of the Community Development Director's
written decision, an individual may appeal an adverse decision. Appeals from
the adverse decision shall be made in writing.
   (B)   If an individual needs assistance in filing an appeal on an adverse
decision, the city will provide assistance to ensure that the appeals process
is accessible.
   (C)   All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal.
Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in
a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be
made available for public inspection.
   (D)   Appeal procedures are set for by §
153.251: Appeal. Decisions by staff may be appealed to the Planning Commission
and decisions of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council.
   (E)   Nothing in this procedure shall preclude an aggrieved individual from
seeking any other state or federal remedy available.
(Ord. 2015-004, passed 2-24-15)
AMENDMENTS
§ 153.230 PROVISIONS CHANGED.
   This chapter may be amended by changing the boundaries of districts or by
changing any other provisions thereof whenever the public necessity and
convenience and the general welfare require such amendment by the following
procedure of this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 10-16-1)
§ 153.231 INITIATION.
   (A)   An amendment may be initiated by the verified petition of any one or
more owners of property affected by the proposed amendment, which petition
shall be filed with the Planning Commission, and shall be accompanied by a fee
as set by the City Council, no part of which shall be returnable to the
petitioner; or
   (B)   By resolution of intention of the Council; or
   (C)   By resolution of intention of the Planning Commission.
(`67 Code, § 10-16-2)
§ 153.232 PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   Public hearings. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one
public hearing on any amendment. Notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be given at least ten calendar days before the hearing in the following
manner:
      (1)   By the publication at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation.
      (2)   By causing notices to be mailed to all property owners within the
district of which the boundaries are proposed to be changed, or whose property
is proposed to be reclassified from one district to another, as shown on the
preceding assessment roll of the county, and to all owners of properties
bordering or within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the district.
      (3)   Failure to receive notice required by the subsection shall not
invalidate the amendment.
      (4)   The notice required by this division shall specify the type and
magnitude of the changes proposed, the place where copies of the proposed
changes may be obtained, the time, date and place of the hearing, and the right
to appear and be heard.
   (B)   Action. Following the public hearing(s) prescribed above, the Planning
Commission shall make a written recommendation to the City Council. The
favorable recommendation to any amendment shall be carried by the affirmative
vote of a majority of the voting members of the Planning Commission present.
(`67 Code, § 10-16-3) (Ord. 82-7, passed 9-27-82)
§ 153.233 CITY COUNCIL ACTION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation, the Council
shall set the matter for public hearing after giving notice thereof in the same
manner as provided for in §
153.232(A).
   (B)   After conclusion of such hearing the Council may adopt the amendment
or any part thereof in such form as the Council may deem advisable provided
that the proposed change is carried by a majority of the voting members of the
Council.
   (C)   The decision of the Council shall be rendered within 60 days after the
receipt of a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 83-9, passed 8-22-83)
(`67 Code, § 10-16-4)
§ 153.234 PREZONING.
   Prezoning applications shall be handled pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter.
(`67 Code, § 10-16-5)
§ 153.235 EFFECT.
   No application for a zoning change which has been denied wholly or in part
by the City Council shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date
the order of denial became final, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of
changed conditions found to be valid by the City Council.
(`67 Code, § 10-16-6) (Ord. 82-7, passed 9-27-82)
ENFORCEMENT; INTERPRETATION
§ 153.245 APPLICABILITY TO PUBLIC AGENCIES.
   The provisions of this subchapter to the extent permitted by law, shall
apply to all public bodies, districts and agencies, federal, state, county and
municipal, (other than the city), provided, however, that variance permits and
amendments to such governmental units may be applied for and granted without
payment of the application fee.
(`67 Code, § 10-17-1)
§ 153.246 INTERPRETATION.
   When interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Except as
specifically herein provided, it is not intended by the adoption of this
chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with
any existing provision of law, ordinance or any rules, regulations or permits
previously adopted or issued, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to
law relating to the erection, construction, establishment, moving, alteration
or enlargement of any building or improvements; nor is it intended by this
chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other
agreement between parties, provided, however, that in cases in which this code
imposes a greater restriction upon the erection, construction, establishment,
moving, alteration or enlargement of building or the use of any such building
or premises in the several districts or any of them, than is imposed or
required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance or by such rules,
regulations or permits or by such easements, covenants or agreements, then in
such cases the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(`67 Code, § 10-17-2)
§ 153.247 REVOCATION; EXPIRATION OF PERMITS.
   The Planning Commission after a public hearing held in the manner prescribed
in this subchapter governing variances and conditional use permits, may revoke
or modify any permit or variance issued on any one or more of the following
grounds:
   (A)   That the approval was obtained by fraud.
   (B)   That the use for which such approval was granted is not being
exercised.
   (C)   That the use for which such approval was granted has ceased to exist
or has been suspended for one year or more.
   (D)   That the permit or variance granted is being, or has been exercised
contrary to the terms or conditions of any statute, ordinance, law or
regulation.
   (E)   That the use for which the approval was granted was so exercised as to
be detrimental to the public health or safety, or so as to constitute a
nuisance.
   (F)   That the continued exercise of the use for which approval was granted
appears to be inimicable to the public welfare.
(`67 Code, § 10-17-3)
§ 153.248 ENFORCEMENT.
   All departments, official and public employees of the city vested with the
duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions
of this chapter, and shall issue no permit or license for uses, buildings or
purposes in conflict with the provisions of this chapter and any permit or
license issued in conflict shall be null and void. It shall be the duty of the
Building Inspector of the city to enforce the provisions pertaining to the
erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration or
addition to any building or structure.
(`67 Code, § 10-17-4)
§ 153.249 NUISANCE.
   Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged,
converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this code, and any
use of any land, building or premises established, conducted, operated or
maintained contrary to the provisions of this code shall be and the same is
hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the Attorney shall
upon order of the Council, immediately commence action or proceedings for the
abatement and removal and enjoyment thereof in the manner provided by law and
shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have
jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such building or
structure and restrain and enjoin any person from setting up, erecting,
building, maintaining or using any such building.
(`67 Code, § 10-17-5)
§ 153.250 FILING FEES.
   Fees for the processing of various applications under this chapter may be
set from time to time by resolution of the Council.
(`67 Code, § 10-17-6)
§ 153.251 APPEAL.
   Any applicant or other person which is dissatisfied with a decision
resulting from the application, interpretation or enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter may appeal that decision provided that the appeal is in writing
and clearly sets forth the reasons why the appeal ought to be granted:
   (A)   Interpretations of this chapter by staff can be appealed to the
Planning Commission.
   (B)   Decisions of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City
Council.
(`67 Code, § 10-17-7) (Ord. 82-7, passed 9-27-82)
HOME OCCUPATIONS
§ 153.265 APPLICATION.
   Applications for home occupations are administered by the Planning
Department and may exist in any residential district.
(`67 Code, § 6-4-1) (Ord. 92-07, passed 7-13-92)
§ 153.266 CRITERIA.
   It is the intent of the following criteria to reduce the impact of the home
occupation to the degree that its effects on the neighborhood are undetectable
from normal and usual residential activity:
   (A)   Only occupants of the dwelling shall be engaged in home occupation on
the subject property. In the event of a partnership or corporation, at least
one of the members must be a resident of the subject property.
   (B)   Off-site employees or partners are permitted so long as they do not
work or report for work at subject property.
   (C)   The use of the dwelling for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes. The home
occupation may be conducted in the principal dwelling or accessory structure on
the subject property, provided that the area does not exceed 20% of the
habitable floor area of the principal dwelling.
   (D)   There shall be no mechanical equipment or operation used which creates
or makes noise, dust, odor, vibration or other effects detectable at the
property line. Noise level at the property line shall not exceed 65 dBA.
   (E)   There shall be no display of products produced by the home occupation
visible in any manner from the outside of the dwelling unit.
   (F)   The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that
which is normal in a residential district nor in any case require the parking
of more than two additional vehicles at any one time.
   (G)   There shall be no storage of material or supplies out of doors.
   (H)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building
premises, or any visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other
than one sign not to exceed two square feet.
   (I)   There shall be no advertising of a home occupation which uses the
address of the location.
   (J)   The following specific home occupation uses shall be permitted subject
to further limitations as follows:
      (1)   Beauty/barber shops limited to one customer.
      (2)   Contractors' and subcontractors' offices are permitted as home
occupations. However, the storage of materials, equipment, commercial vehicles
of more than one ton, nor more than one vehicle of less than one ton not
normally associated with residential uses shall be prohibited.
      (3)   Swimming lessons, music lessons and other similar lessons, when
given to no more than three students at a time.
(`67 Code, § 6-4-2) (Ord. 92-07, passed 7-13-92)
§ 153.267 PROHIBITED USES.
   The following uses are expressly prohibited as home occupations:
   (A)   Repair or reconditioning of motorized vehicles or equipment, on site.
   (B)   Manufacturing, including cabinet shops and similar uses.
   (C)   Repair or reconditioning of major household appliances, including
refrigerators, freezers, clothes washers/dryers, dish washers, stoves, heating
and air-conditioning equipment and lawn mowers.
   (D)   Repair or reconditioning of boats or recreational vehicles.
   (E)   Medical, dental and chiropractic clinics and offices.
   (F)   There shall be no delivery of merchandise to customers at the premises
other than that incidental to a service conducted on the premises.
(`67 Code, § 6-4-3) (Ord. 92-07, passed 7-13-92)
SIGNS
§ 153.280 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of this sign ordinance regulation to preserve and enhance
the aesthetic, traffic safety and environmental values of our communities and
growing business/industrial districts, while at the same time providing for
channels of communication to the public. It also is the city's intent to
regulate on the basis of characteristic and proportion of signage. The city
finds as to commercial signage that it is in the interest of both aesthetics
and traffic safety that sign information be kept to a minimum. The use of
subordinate information in commercial signage which presents as a traffic
hazard will not be allowed. Non-commercial signage, which rights are
constitutionally broader, is permitted unless expressly prohibited within this
chapter.
(`67 Code, § 10-19-1) (Ord. 2000-03, passed 4-24-00; Am. Ord. 2020- 001, passed
1-28-20)
§ 153.281 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BENCH SIGN. A bus bench located outdoors with advertising matter thereon.
   BULLETIN BOARD. A sign used to announce a coming event or attraction or used
to convey a specific message related to the building or use of the property on
which the bulletin board is located. In all zones, bulletin boards which are
displayed so as to be viewed from a public street, parking lot, walkway or mall
shall be subject to the sign regulation of the zone in which the building or
property is located.
   CANOPY. A roof of a building or a fixed overhead shelter used as a roof,
which may or may not be attached to a building and which does not encroach into
nor overhang a public street or alley right-of-way.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8dfb8da9c7e034d065e4df4551fc7d501d41c6d1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5608.gif]
 
   CANOPY SIGN . A sign attached to or hung from a canopy but not projecting
from the face of the canopy.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN . A sign with the names of architects, engineers,
contractors, subcontractors and financing agencies of buildings and structures
being constructed upon the premises on which the sign is located.
   CORPORATE FLAG. A flag identifying a business or firm.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. One of two types of signs. An exterior directional sign
shall mean a sign oriented to a street and used to direct and control
pedestrian or vehicular traffic and located on the same lot or premises as the
use which it is intended to serve. An interior directional sign shall mean a
directional, warning or information sign not bearing any advertising message
readable from any street right-of-way. It shall be located on the same lot or
premises as the use which it is intended to serve.
   ELECTRONIC SIGNAGE. Also known as electronic signs, displays, message signs,
and reader boards, may use technologies such as LCD, LED, projection, e-paper
or similar to display digital images or text. May be located on private or
public property as a monument sign for churches, schools, and banks or as a
monument or wall sign for limited commercial and industrial locations. City
electronic signs may include decorative pole (freestanding) signs which will be
reviewed by the City Council on a case by case basis. Future Technologies.
There may be alternate, preferred, or superior technology available in the
future to illuminate electronic signs. These alternate technologies may be
incorporated into existing legally permitted electronic signs in the future
without additional permission from the city so long as no exterior change to
the digital display area will occur and an electrical permit is obtained if
necessary.
   ERECT. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, paint or affix.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign detached from any building or structure, and the
supports of which are permanently affixed on the ground.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8dfb8da9c7e034d065e4df4551fc7d501d41c6d1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5613.gif]
 
   HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the highest point used in measuring the
area of a sign to the top of the curb of the street at a point which is closest
to the highest point of the sign.
   IDENTIFICATION SIGN. Any sign which is used to identify or advertise the
occupancy of a building, lot or premises or the merchandise or activity
available at the building, lot or premises where the sign is located.
   LIGHTED SIGN. Any sign which is illuminated either directly or indirectly by
artificial light.
   MARQUEE . A fixed overhead shelter used as a roof, which may or may not be
attached to a building, and which projects into or overhangs a public street or
alley right-of-way .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8dfb8da9c7e034d065e4df4551fc7d501d41c6d1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5629.gif]
 
   MONUMENT SIGN. A low-profile freestanding sign, with its base resting on the
ground and incorporating the design and building materials complementary to the
architectural theme of the building(s) on the same property. Monument signs are
required to have a minimum 12 foot setback from all property lines and may not
exceed eight feet in height (including base) and 50 square feet in total area
per side. It may have an electronic reader board component if the monument is
for a church, school, or bank or it is located in a commercial or industrial
zone and there are no other electronic monument signs within 1,000 feet of the
parcel.
   NON-COMMERCIAL. In each instance and under the same conditions to which this
chapter permits any sign, a sign containing an ideological, political or other
non-commercial message shall be permitted.
   OPEN HOUSE DIRECTIONAL SIGN. An arrow or other directional symbol and real
estate office name.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN (BILLBOARDS). A sign of the outdoor advertising
business, which advertises products, accommodations, services or activities not
provided on the premises on which it is located. Also known as a BILLBOARD.
These signs are prohibited under this chapter. This definition does not pertain
to non-commercial messages.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8dfb8da9c7e034d065e4df4551fc7d501d41c6d1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5632.gif]
 
   PERMANENT SIGN. Every sign except TEMPORARY SIGNS as defined herein .
   POLE SIGN. A sign which is not attached to a building but which has its own
separa te support system and shall includ e a freest anding sign.
   POLITICAL SIGN. Any impermanent sign or advertising device or display, with
or without letters, words, numbers or figures thereon, which is designed to
advertise a candidate for political office, a political party or a measure
scheduled for an election.
   PRINCIPAL FRONTAGE. That wall of a building or structure which has frontage
on a public street, highway, parking lot, walkway or mall and which is designed
as the principal frontage of the building or structure.
   PROJECTING SIGN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any sign attached to and projecting from the face of a wall, canopy
or marquee.
      (2)   Any sign mounted on a canopy roof or building roof that has a slope
flatter than a 45 degree angle.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8dfb8da9c7e034d065e4df4551fc7d501d41c6d1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5635.gif]
 
   RIDGELINE. The peak of the roof , the top of a parapet, or the top of the
wall of a building .
   SIGN . Any structure, device, letter, figure, character, poster, picture,
trademark or reading matter which is used or designed to announce, declare,
demonstrate, display or otherwise identify or advertise, or attract the
attention of the public. However, a sign shall not include the following:
      (1)   Official notices authorized by a court, public body or public
officer.
      (2)   Directional, warning or informational signs authorized by federal,
state or municipal authority or public utility.
      (3)   A properly displayed official flag of a government, school,
religious group, or nonprofit organization.
      (4)   A memorial plaque, tablet or cornerstone indicating the name of a
building and date of construction, when cut or carved into any masonry surface
or when made of bronze or other incombustible material and made an integral
part of the building or structure, not to exceed four square feet in area.
      (5)   Signs within a building which cannot be seen from outside the
building.
   SIGN AREA. The area of the sign surface computed by calculating the area of
the circle, square, triangle, rectangle or combination of such geometric
designs necessary to enclose such sign surface.  Where a sign has two or more
faces (sign surfaces), the area of all faces shall be inclu ded in deter mining
the sign area, except where two such faces are placed back to back and are at
no point more than one foot from one another, the sign area shall be taken as
the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the
larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. Necessary supports or
uprights on which a sign is placed shall not be included in the sign area,
provided that they are not used to attract attention to the subject matter
included in the sign area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8dfb8da9c7e034d065e4df4551fc7d501d41c6d1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5650.gif]
 
   SIGN SURFACE. The surface of the sign upon, against or through which the
message is displayed or illustrated.
   SUBDIVISION SIGN. A sign indicating the name of a recorded subdivision, the
name of the contractor or subdivider, the name of the owner or agent, and/or
giving information regarding directions, price and/or terms.
   SUBDIVISION DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign indicating the name of a recorded
subdivision and information regarding location. The name of the contractor or
subdivider, the name of the owner or agent and/or information regarding price
and/or terms may also be noted.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign, banner, pennant, freestanding flag, valance,
balloon, streamer, placard, “A”-frame, sandwich board, human sign spinner,
inflatable air dancers, or similar impermanent sign or advertising device or
display, with or without letters, words, numbers, or figures thereon, with or
without frames, which directs, promotes service or price, or which is otherwise
designed to attract attention for a short period of time only unless otherwise
specifically mentioned in this chapter.
   WALL. Any wall or element of a wall or any number or group of members which
defines the exterior boundaries or courts of a building or structure and which
has a slope steeper than one horizontal to two vertical, with the horizontal
plane.
   WALL SIGN. Any sign painted on, attached to or erected against the wall of a
building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a place
approximately parallel to the place of the wall and which does not project
beyond the top or ends of the wall. WALL SIGN shall also mean any sign
permanently displayed on the inside or outside of a window.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8dfb8da9c7e034d065e4df4551fc7d501d41c6d1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5653.gif]
 
   WINDOW SIGN. Any sign temporarily displayed on the inside of a window or
temporarily painted on a window and facing a street, highway, parking lot,
walkway or mall.
   ZONE. One of the various classes of area into which the city has been
divided by this chapter.
(`67 Code, § 10-19-2) (Am. Ord. 2000-03, passed 4-24-00; Am. Ord. 2020-001,
passed 1-28-20)
§ 153.282 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter,
change, copy or relocate within the city any sign as defined herein without
first obtaining a permit from the City Manager (or his designated
representative) and making payment of the required fee therefor, except that
the following listed signs are not required to have permits or pay permit fees,
but shall meet all other requirements of this chapter:
      (1)   Construction sign.
      (2)   For sale or rent sign not exceeding eight square feet in area.
      (3)   Garage sale sign.
      (4)   Unlighted interior directional, warning or information system when
less than 12 square feet in area.
      (5)   Nameplate, two square feet maximum size.
      (6)   Open house directional sign.
      (7)   Political signs permitted by §
153.285.
      (8)   Signs for fireworks stands, pumpkin sales, Christmas tree sale
lots.
      (9)   Subdivision directional signs.
      (10)   Corporate flag when its height does not exceed the roof line.
      (11)   Bench sign.
      (12)   Signs which identify the architects, engineers, contractors, or
builders associated with construction work on the premises during the time
period such work is being conducted.
      (13)   Advertising signs on the perimeter fencing of athletic fields.
Such signs shall be on the interior of the fence only, shall have the
advertising facing the interior of the field, shall not exceed the height of
the fence and shall not be subject to any other restrictions of this chapter.
   (B)   Application for permit. Application for the sign permits shall be made
upon forms provided by the City Manager (or his designated representative) and
shall contain or have attached thereto such information as may be required by
the City Manager (or his designated representative) to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this code. The application shall be accompanied by a fee in
an amount set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Permit issued if application is in order. It shall be the duty of the
City Manager (or his designated representative) to issue the sign permits if
the application is complete, the sign complies with the provisions of this code
and the fee has been paid.
   (D)   Signs falling within definition of one or more type signs. Whenever
any sign, as defined in this chapter, falls entirely within the definitions of
one or more type signs, it shall be subject to the provisions of the most
restrictive category.
   (E)   Permit issued in error. If a sign permit is issued in error by the
City Manager (or his designated representative) and the sign does not comply
with all of the requirements of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances
of the city, the sign permit shall be null and void, and no rights or
privileges shall be conferred upon the permittee by the permit.
   (F)   Compliance with chapter, nuisance, abatement. The City Council hereby
determines that the public peace, safety, morals, health and welfare require
that all signs which shall hereafter be constructed, erected or painted in
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be and they are hereby
declared public nuisances to be removed and abated in the manner provided
herein.
   (G)   Identification. Every sign hereafter erected, altered or relocated
shall have recorded thereon in a conspicuous place in order to be readily
visible, the date of erection, alteration or relocation, the permit number,
voltage of any electrical apparatus used in connection therewith and the name
of the person, firm or company doing the work. The information shall not exceed
16 square inches in area.
   (H)   Maintenance of signs. The owner of any sign as defined and regulated
by this chapter, including supporting structures, shall keep the same in a
presentable condition at all times. All painted signs and all supporting
structures of any sign shall be repainted to keep them in good condition
whenever such action is requested in writing by the City Manager (or his
designated representative).
   (I)   Unlawful signs. If the City Manager (or his designated representative)
shall find that any sign which has been constructed or erected or is being
maintained in violation of the provisions hereof, written notice shall be given
of such conditions to the permittee or in the event no valid permit exists, to
the owner thereof. If the permittee or the owner thereof, as the case may be,
fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the standards herein set
forth, within 30 days after such notice, such signs may be removed or altered
to comply when so directed by the City Manager and such cost shall be at the
expense of the permittee or the owner of the property upon which the sign is
located.
      (1)   Any sign found to be unsafe and an immediate peril to persons or
property may be removed summarily and without notice when so directed by the
City Manager. The cost of such removal shall be assessed against the owner of
the sign removed.
      (2)   Any sign erected upon public property in violation of the
provisions hereof may be removed or destroyed when so directed by the City
Manager.
      (3)   The cost of removal or alteration of any sign and any expense
incident thereto which by the terms of this section shall be paid by a
permittee, sign owner, property owner or any other person shall become a debt
owing the city. The city may initiate civil action in its own name for
collection of the debt.
(`67 Code, § 10-19-3) (Am. Ord. 2020-001, passed 1-28-20)
§ 153.283 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section a NONCONFORMING SIGN is any sign which
does not conform with the provisions of this chapter but was lawfully erected
and which was lawfully in existence and in use on May 1, 1986.
   (B)   A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced, altered, reconstructed,
relocated or expanded in any manner unless it is made to conform with all the
provisions of this chapter, except as follows:
      (1)   Other nonconforming signs on the same property need not be made to
conform as a result.
      (2)   Change in copy shall be permitted if no structural changes in the
sign are necessary except that no change in copy shall be permitted for
nonconforming painted wall signs.
      (3)   Ordinary maintenance and minor repairs which will not increase the
normal life of the sign and which are required for safety purposes shall be
permitted. Structural alterations to a nonconforming sign are prohibited unless
they are made to conform to all requirements of the city code.
   (C)   If the use identified by a nonconforming sign is abandoned for a
period of 90 days, the sign shall be removed unless it is made to conform to
the provisions of this chapter. If such sign is not made to conform or if it is
not removed within 120 days from the time the use is abandoned, it shall
thereafter be unlawful. ABANDONED, as used in this division, shall mean
cessation of operation or change of use. ABANDONED shall not mean an ownership
change or a name change as long as there is not cessation of the operation for
longer than 90 days and the use is not changed.
(`67 Code, § 10-19-4) (Am. Ord. 2020-001, passed 1-28-20)
§ 153.284 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Height limitation. The maximum height of any sign shall be as stated
herein, but in no case shall a sign exceed 40 feet in height. An exception is
city electronic signs which may be up to 50 feet in height in commercial and
industrial zoning districts.
   (B)   Rotating, moving, flashing, changing or blinking signs. No sign shall
have or consist of any moving, rotating or otherwise animated part or any
flashing, blinking, fluctuating or otherwise animated light. The provisions of
this division shall not be applied so as to prohibit the following types of
signs:
      (1)   A sign showing time separately and which changes no more often than
once every ten seconds or a conventional clock face.
      (2)   A sign showing temperature separately and which changes only when
the temperature rises or falls one degree or more.
      (3)   A sign showing time and temperature alternately and which changes
no more often than once every ten seconds.
      (4)   An on-premises barber pole of a length not to exceed 30 inches of
traditional design which shall be permitted to revolve during the time that a
barber shop is open for business. The sign shall not exceed ten feet in height.
   (C)   Projections. All signs, if otherwise authorized, are permitted to
project into required front, side and rear yard. The permitted projecting of an
authorized sign into any street or alley right-of-way is as follows:
      (1)   Freestanding sign: No projection.
      (2)   Wall sign: Up to 14 inches in thickness.
      (3)   Marquee sign: No closer than two feet from the face of the curb.
      (4)   Projecting sign: Up to six feet into any street right-of-way and up
to four feet into any alley right-of-way, but not closer than two feet from the
face of the curb.
      (5)   Bus bench sign: Entirely within street right-of-way.
      (6)   City electronic sign: No restrictions.
   (D)   Vertical and horizontal clearance. No sign shall be less than eight
feet above a public or private sidewalk or 16 feet above ground level in areas
open to vehicular traffic except wall signs not exceeding three inches in
thickness.
      (1)   Signs shall not be erected within the triangle created by the lines
connecting:
         (a)   The point of intersection of front and side property lines
extended into the intersection of two streets or other public right-of-way
abutting the property lines; and
         (b)   The points on such front and side property lines 40 feet distant
from the point of intersection, when the erection of other privately owned
buildings and structures is prohibited therein.
      (2)   No permit for any sign shall be issued and no sign shall be
constructed or maintained which has less horizontal or vertical clearance from
communication lines and energized electrical power lines than that prescribed
by the laws of the state or rules and regulations duly promulgated by agencies
thereof.
   (E)   Obstructions to doors, windows or fire escapes. No sign shall be
erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress
from any door, window, fire escape or exit way.
   (F)   Construction standards. All signs, including all parts, portions,
units, and material comprising the same together with the frames, backgrounds,
supports and anchorage therefor shall be manufactured, fabricated, assembled,
constructed and erected in accordance with applicable Building, Electrical and
Fire Prevention and Sign Codes of the city.
   (G)   Illuminated signs. Any illuminated sign or lighting device shall
employ only lights emitting a light of constant intensity, and no sign shall be
illuminated by or contain flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving light or
lights. In no event shall an illuminated sign or lighting device be so placed
or directed so as to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed
or beamed upon a public street, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to
cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance.
   (H)   Signs not to constitute vehicular traffic hazard. No sign as regulated
in this chapter shall be erected at the intersection of any street, or at any
railroad grade crossing, or at any driveway in such a manner as to obstruct
free and clear vision of operations of motor vehicles or at any location where,
by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the
view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or
which makes use of the words “STOP,” “DANGER,” or any other word, phrase,
symbol, or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
traffic.
   (I)   Temporary signs for special events. Temporary signs, in excess of the
maximum permissible sign area, may be erected as participation in a public
parade, public event or public celebration for a period not to exceed 30 days,
provided, however, that the erection of such signs shall be approved by the
City Manager as to location, safety and period of display. Temporary cloth
signs and rigid signs shall be allowed as regulated in this division and as
described in chapter 14 of the Uniform Sign Code except that rigid signs shall
be limited to a sign area of 32 square feet and may be displayed for no longer
than 30 days.
   (J)   Bench signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install or
maintain any bench sign, except on public property in a location approved by
the City Manager. Such benches shall only be placed as necessary to serve
existing public transit needs and shall require an encroachment permit.
   (K)   Wall signs, additional standards. No wall sign shall exceed 14 inches
in thickness; no display or messages shall be permitted on the edges of wall
signs except the sign company's identification as required by §
153.282(G).
(Ord. 86-06, passed 4-14-86)
   (L)   Ridgeline limitation. A wall, canopy, marquee, or projecting sign
shall not project above the ridge line of the building on which the sign is
mounted.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
   (M)   Building outlining. Outlining of a building or its roof by means of
permanent lighting by exposed neon tubing, exposing incandescent lighting or
other artificial lighting, or an equivalent effect, is prohibited. Outlining
means delineation, with a row or band of lights of the edges of a roof or wall
surface. This provision does not prohibit floodlighting or generally
illuminating buildings and their roofs for temporary Christmas displays.
   (N)   No signs on street trees, utility poles or structures in street right-
of-way. No signs shall be attached to any street tree, or any poles such as
utility poles, street signals, street lights, street name signs or traffic
warning signs, or on any bus shelter.
(`67 Code, § 10-19-5) (Am. Ord. 2020-001, passed 1-28-20)
§ 153.285 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN ZONES.
   (A)   Specific requirements of type, area and height of signs in the R-1, R-
2, and R-3 zones. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or
maintain on any lot or parcel any sign of a type having an area and/or height
in violation of the following specific requirements:
      (1)   In the R-1 and R-2 zones, the following on-site signs are permitted
except as otherwise stated:
         (a)   One unlighted for sale or rent sign per street frontage, not
exceeding eight square feet in area and six feet in height.
         (b)   Three unlighted open house directional signs, each not exceeding
three square feet in area and three feet in height, which shall be permitted
during daylight hours only, for each house or group of houses offered for sale
by the same realtor at the same general location, provided that they do not
bear any advertising message other than the real estate office name, and that
such signs are located wholly on private property with permission of the
property owner on whose property they are located.
         (c)   One wall-mounted name plate not exceeding two square feet in
area.
         (d)   For nonresidential uses permitted by conditional use permit,
additional signing as follows:
            1.   One bulletin board or identification sign not exceeding 25
square feet in area and six feet in height.
            2.   Canopy and wall identification signs limited to one-half
square foot in combined sign area for each lineal foot of any wall and not
exceeding 40 feet in height. Canopy and wall identification signs may have
external illumination only; no internal illumination shall be permitted.
         (e)   For mobile home parks permitted by conditional use permit, there
may be in addition one identification sign limited to 12 square feet in area
and not exceeding six feet in height located at the main entrance to the park.
         (f)   One construction sign not exceeding 20 square feet in area and
six feet in height, provided that such sign shall be removed not later than 30
days after construction is completed.
         (g)   One on-site subdivision sign not exceeding 100 square feet in
area and ten feet in height for each recorded subdivision, provided that such
sign shall be removed not later than two years from the recording date of the
subdivision, except as follows:
            1.   Where building permits have been taken out for more than one-
half but less than 75% of the lots in such subdivision at the end of the two-
year period, such sign may remain for an additional one year period or until
building permits have been issued on all lots, whichever occurs first.
            2.   Where building permits have been taken out for one-half or
less of the lots in such subdivision at the end of the two-year period, such
sign may remain for an additional two-year period or until building permits
have been issued on all the lots, whichever occurs first.
         (h)   Unlighted subdivision directional signs not exceeding 16 square
feet in area and six feet in height for each recorded subdivision as follows:
            1.   When the boundaries of any recorded subdivision or any part
thereof abut an arterial, as identified in the general plan, one subdivision
directional sign shall be permitted, which sign may be located on any vacant
lot or parcel which is owned by the subdivision owner.
            2.   When the boundaries of any recorded subdivision, or any part
thereof, do not abut an arterial as identified in the general plan, two
subdivision directional signs shall be permitted, which signs may be located as
follows:
               a.   One such sign may be located on property not owned by the
subdivision owner with the permission of the property owner on whose property
it is to be located.
               b.   One or both signs may be located only on property owned by
the subdivision owner.
            3.   Such signs shall be removed not later than two years from the
recording date of the subdivision, except as follows:
               a.   Where building permits have been taken out for more than
one-half but less than 75% of the lots in such subdivision at the end of the
two-year period, such signs may remain for an additional one year period or
until building permits have been issued on all of the lots, whichever occurs
first.
               b.   Where building permits have been taken out for one-half or
less of the lots in such subdivision at the end of the two-year period, such
signs may remain for an additional two-year period or until building permits
have been issued on all of the lots, whichever occurs first.
         (i)   Political signs, which may be erected, maintained and displayed
as follows:
            1.   Political signs placed in a residential zone district with a
dwelling shall not exceed eight square feet, not to exceed in any dimension
four feet, and such improved lot with a dwelling shall not be limited to the
number of political signs but shall be limited as to the total cumulative area
not to exceed 32 square feet.
            2.   Any one political sign shall not exceed 32 square feet on
vacant residential parcels. There shall be no restrictions as to the number of
political signs posted on vacant residential property.
            3.   Political signs shall be removed within 15 days after the date
of the election.
            4.   Under no circumstance shall political signs interfere with
driver expectations for sight distances on any particular street as determined
by the Community Development Director.
         (j)   Window signs are not permitted unless they meet all other
requirements listed in this section, including the limitation on sign area.
         (k)   Except for city electronic signs, outdoor advertising signs are
not permitted. City electronic signs are permitted on public or private
property, owned or leased, with a 100 foot minimum setback from residential
uses. In residential zones, they may consist of, at most, two digital display
areas with an interior angle of 90 degrees or less. The maximum height of a
city electronic sign shall be 40 feet, the maximum area of each digital display
area is ten feet by 20 feet, and the signs shall display static messages only.
Each message on the screen must be displayed for a minimum of eight seconds.
Each digital display area shall have a light sensing device that will adjust
the brightness of the sign as ambient light conditions change throughout the
day. The ability to power the sign by mobile generator during power outages is
required for public safety purposes.
         (l)   Two unlighted garage sale signs not exceeding three square feet
each in area may be displayed as follows:
            1.   The signs may be displayed only during such times as the
garage sale being advertised is actually being held or conducted.
            2.   The signs may only be erected and displayed on private
property with the consent of the owner thereof. They may not be erected or
displayed on street trees, utility poles or elsewhere in public rights-of-way.
         (m)   Interior directional, warning and information signs not
exceeding six square feet in area and six feet in height.
         (n)   For sale or rent signs between eight and 32 square feet in area
subject to securing a use permit. Approval of the permit shall be based on the
relationship between the size of the sign and the size of the property.
      (2)   In the R-3 zone, the following on-site signs are permitted:
         (a)   Any signs permitted in the R-1 and R-2 zones, including city
electronic signs.
         (b)   One multiple-family housing project sign per street frontage,
each sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area and six feet in height.
   (B)   Specific requirements for type, area and height of signs in the C-1,
C-2, C-M, CX-1, M-1, M-2, and PD zones. It shall be unlawful for any person to
erect, construct or maintain on any lot or parcel any sign of a type having an
area and/or height in violation of the following specific requirements:
      (1)   In the C-1 zone, C-2 zone, C-M zone, and CX-1 zone the following
on-site signs are permitted, except as otherwise stated:
         (a)   Subject to approval of the City Manager (or his designated
representative), a shopping center, as herein defined, shall be entitled to
erect one freestanding shopping center identification sign, hereinafter
referred to as a shopping center identification sign for each street upon which
the shopping center fronts, subject to the following provisions:
            1.   Each shopping center sign shall not exceed 100 square feet in
area. One electronic shopping center identification sign may be approved for
each street upon which the shopping center fronts if the sign is included as
part of the 100 square foot total sign area allowance. Said sign may only
advertise the shopping center name and its tenant names and/or special events.
Advertising specific products or off site business locations is prohibited.
            2.   The identification on each shopping center sign shall be
limited to the shopping center name with a listing of uses or businesses within
the center optional. The lettering for the listing of such uses shall be of a
size not greater than one-half the size of the lettering of the shopping center
name on such sign.
            3.   After erection of a shopping center sign or signs authorized
herein, at a shopping center, no additional freestanding or projection
identification sign shall be erected at such shopping center for any use or
occupancy therein.
            4.   In granting an application for a shopping center sign, the
City Manager (or his designated representative) shall determine whether the
applicant is within such shopping center, after consideration of the following,
factors:
               a.   A shopping center is usually comprised of a cluster of
retail uses at one location held out to the public as a distinct shopping area
and having at least one retail use with a minimum area for that use of 20,000
square feet, and having a minimum of five other retail uses on the same or
adjacent sites.
               b.   A shopping center is not normally traversed by any public
street.
               c.   The existence of any common advertising program for such
center, or any uses or occupancies conducted therein, and the number of uses or
occupancies conducted therein which participate in such program.
         (b)   Canopy, marquee and wall identification signs, provided:
            1.   The signs shall be limited to the portion of a building
wherein the use or occupancy is conducted.
            2.   The maximum total area for all the signs shall be limited as
follows:
               a.   For the principal frontage of the building as designated by
the applicant:
 
Maximum Total Area for All Canopy
Building Frontage Marquee/Wall Identification Signs
First 50 feet     4 square feet per lineal foot of building frontage; plus
Next 50 feet      2 square feet per lineal foot of building frontage; plus
Over 100 feet     1 square feet per lineal foot of building frontage
 
               b.   For each other frontage of the building:
 
Maximum Total Area for All Canopy
Building Frontage Marquee/Wall Identification Signs
First 50 feet     4 square feet per lineal foot of building frontage; plus
Next 50 feet      2 square feet per lineal foot of building frontage; plus
Over 100 feet     0.5 square feet per lineal foot of building frontage
 
            3.   The signs shall not exceed 40 feet in height nor project above
a ridgeline more than ten feet. City electronic signs may not exceed 50 feet in
height in commercial zones.
            4.   That signs hung from a canopy shall not be less than eight
feet above a private sidewalk or 16 feet above ground level in areas open to
vehicular traffic.
            5.   That marquee signs shall be parallel with the building upon
which they are mounted and parallel with the public street or alley into which
they project or overhang.
(Ord. 86-06, passed 4-14-86)
         (c)   For any freestanding use or occupancy, one monument-type
freestanding identification sign not to exceed eight feet in height, including
any base, nor more than 100 square feet in area, may be approved subject to
securing the approval of the City Manager (or his designated representative).
The monument sign may include an electronic reader board component if the
monument is for a church, school, or bank or it is located in a commercial or
industrial zone and there are no other electronic reader boards within 1,000
feet of the parcel. The approval will be dependent upon the following two
findings being shown:
            1.   That the use or occupancy is a freestanding use. For the
purpose of this section, a freestanding use is defined as a use or occupancy
that does not attract customers by its proximity to another business or
businesses and is not part of a shopping center or any group of businesses that
jointly attract customers through their proximity to each other or through
common advertising.
            2.   The total sign area of the freestanding sign as well as all
canopy, marquee and wall signs shall not exceed the sign area allowed in
division (B)(1)(b) above.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
         (d)   Directional signs located wholly on private property on the
premises to which they pertain as follows:
            1.   One exterior directional sign per use per street frontage of
the site not exceeding six square feet in area and three feet in height, and
provided business identification shall not exceed one-half of the area on a
given face sign.
            2.   Any number of interior direction signs, each not exceeding six
square feet in area and six feet in height.
            3.   Two maximum interior directional signs for a drive-in
restaurant or other eating place with drive-through facilities, each sign not
to exceed 30 square feet in area and eight feet in height.
         (e)   One for sale or rent sign, not exceeding 64 square feet in area
and ten feet in height.
         (f)   One construction sign, not exceeding 64 square feet in area and
ten feet in height, provided such sign is removed not later than 30 days after
construction is completed.
         (g)   One marquee sign, not exceeding six square feet in area on any
one side or 12 square feet maximum total area. The sign may be hung from a
marquee, providing such sign shall not be less than eight feet above a public
sidewalk.
         (h)   Any one political sign shall not exceed 32 square feet and there
shall be no restrictions that limit the number of political signs on improved
or unimproved commercial or industrial parcels. Political signs shall be
removed within 15 days after the date of the election.
         (i)   Except for city electronic signs, outdoor advertising signs are
not permitted. City electronic signs are permitted on public or private
property in any zoning district, owned or leased, with a 100 foot minimum
setback from residential uses. In commercial zones, they may consist of at
most, three digital display areas with an interior angle of 60 degrees or less.
Two digital display area signs may have an interior angle of 90 degrees or
less. The maximum height shall be 50 feet, the maximum area of each digital
display area is 14 feet by 48 feet, and the signs shall display static messages
only. Each message on the screen must be displayed for a minimum of eight
seconds. Each digital display area shall have a light sensing device that will
adjust the brightness of the sign as ambient light conditions change throughout
the day. The ability to power the sign by mobile generator during power outages
is required for public safety purposes.
         (j)   Window signs are permitted, provided that the total sign area of
the window signs as well as any other canopy, marquee, wall or freestanding
signs shall not exceed the sign area allowed in division (B)(1)(b) above. A “no
fee” permit will be required to ensure compliance with the sign area
requirements. For businesses which continually utilize window signs (such as,
for weekly specials), only one permit needs to be issued which will allow for
signs to change, providing the approved sign area is not exceeded.
(Ord. 86-06, passed 4-14-86)
         (k)   One monument-type freestanding identification sign not to exceed
eight feet in height, including any base, nor more than 100 square feet in area
shall be permitted to identify a use without any structure, such as a parking
lot. For uses such as Christmas tree sale lots, pumpkin sale lots and firework
stands, one temporary freestanding identification sign shall be permitted, not
exceeding 32 square feet in area and 12 feet in height.
(Ord. 90-01, passed 1-22-90)
         (l)    Signs on service station pump islands, canopy uprights and
nonmovable structures on the pump islands, which shall be permitted if the
combined area of the signs and all other wall and canopy signs does not exceed
the total sign area permitted under division (B)(1)(b) above for the building
on the site and do not project beyond the canopy roof or raised pump island.
The signs shall not exceed ten feet in height if there is no canopy. For self-
service stations with small attendant booths less than ten feet on any side, a
maximum total wall and canopy sign area of 160 square feet is permitted
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8dfb8da9c7e034d065e4df4551fc7d501d41c6d1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6625.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8dfb8da9c7e034d065e4df4551fc7d501d41c6d1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6628.jpg]
 
         (m)    One corporate flag per use or occupancy, not exceeding 24
square feet in area; dimensions relative to each other shall not exceed a ratio
of two to one (2:1). Such flags shall be flown from a flagstaff or flagpole.
         (n)    For sale or rent signs between eight and 32 square feet in area
subject to securing a use permit. Approval of the permit shall be based on the
relationship between the size of the sign and the size of the property.
         (o)   Pennants shall not be displayed for more than 60 days.
      (2)   In the M-1 zone and M-2 zone, the following on-site signs are
permitted, except as otherwise stated:
         (a)   Any sign allowed in the C-1, C-2, C-M, and CX-1 zones, subject
to the same restrictions as in those zones.
         (b)   One of the following signs for each use or occupancy:
            1.   Projecting identification sign not exceeding 72 square feet in
area and 40 feet in height; if any portion projects into or overhangs a public
street or alley right-of-way, the sign shall not exceed 48 square feet in area;
or
            2.   Marquee identification sign at right angles to a street not
exceeding 48 square feet in area and 40 feet in height. A second such marquee
identification sign is permitted if the two signs are single faced, are
parallel, and are on opposite ends of a marquee.
      (3)   For PD (planned development) zones, the following on-site signs are
permitted: Sign limitation shall be made a condition of each PD zone, and
approval shall be based on the provisions of the zoning classification most
closely approximating the uses proposed in the PD zone.
(`67 Code, § 10-19-7) (Ord. 86-06, passed 4-14-86; Am. Ord. 2001-07, passed 7-
23-01; Am. Ord. 2009-002, passed 6-22-09; Am. Ord. 2020-001, passed 1-28-20)
SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
§ 153.295 SERVICES TO SPHERE OF INFLUENCE.
   (A)   Area of service; definition. The City Council shall hereafter be
prohibited from providing or agreeing to provide water, sewer or storm drainage
service, lines or facilities to any lot, parcel, residence, business or
industry which is not within the formally approved and adopted sphere of
influence of the city. SPHERE OF INFLUENCE shall be described as that
designation which is currently used as terminology describing SPHERE OF
INFLUENCE on the date of approval and adoption hereof.
   (B)   Penalty. Violation of provisions of this section shall be a
misdemeanor and upon conviction violators may be punished by fine or
confinement in the county jail as provided by the city code and laws of the
state.
(`67 Code, § 10-20-1) (Ord. 92-05, passed 6-8-92)
SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT SP
§ 153.305 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the specific plan district (SP) is to provide a vehicle for
implementing the city's general plan on an area specific basis. A specific plan
prepared in accordance with the standards set forth herein is intended to serve
as a regulatory document, consistent with the general plan. In the event of an
inconsistency, or conflict between an adopted specific plan and comparable
regulations of the municipal code, the specific plan will prevail.
(Ord. 95-06, passed 4-24-95)
Statutory reference:
   Specific plans, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65450 et seq.
§ 153.306 AUTHORITY.
   Specific plans are authorized by Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65450 et seq. which
specifies minimum contents and provides for fees and an additional
environmental review procedure.
(Ord. 95-06, passed 4-24-95)
§ 153.307 APPLICABILITY.
   Chapter III Section A(9) of the land use element of the general plan
encourages the preparation of specific plans and identifies certain areas of
the city for which specific plans are required prior to development.
(Ord. 95-06, passed 4-24-95)
§ 153.308 DELINEATION OF SPECIFIC PLAN AREAS.
   It is not necessary for specific plan areas to be delineated on the general
plan land use map. On the zoning map a specific plan district will be
delineated in a manner similar to that of any other zoning district except that
each specific plan zoned area shall also bear a number which distinguishes it
from other specific plan areas. In most cases, an adopted specific plan will
create zoning categories unique to that plan; those zoning categories will be
described within the plan itself rather than on the zoning map or in the
municipal code.
(Ord. 95-06, passed 4-24-95)
§ 153.309 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A specific plan shall be adopted by resolution, following public
hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council. Application for other
entitlements may be made simultaneously with the specific plan application. In
some circumstances, simultaneous applications may be necessary.
   (B)   Concurrent with the adoption of a specific plan, the plan area must be
zoned SP and assigned a number as required in
§ 153.308 above. The zoning and specific plan applications may be processed
simultaneously. In some areas it may be necessary or appropriate to link
adoption of the specific plan with adoption of other entitlements or programs
such as subdivision or parcel maps, area facilities plans, design guidelines,
monitoring programs, PD permits, financing mechanisms, etc. The specific plan
shall define the relationship of the plan to other approvals.
(Ord. 95-06, passed 4-24-95)
§ 153.310 APPLICATION.
   The application for a specific plan shall be in accordance with public
hearing processes prescribed in Cal. Gov't Code § 65453 and shall include text
and diagram(s) as required by the Planning Commission to properly evaluate the
ability of the proposed specific plan to carry out the city's general plan. Due
to the significant role an adopted specific plan plays in the implementation of
the general plan, application preparers shall seek guidance from the Planning
Department and, if necessary, the Planning Commission, prior to submitting an
application for a specific plan. Such guidance regarding relevant general plan
goals, policies, land use and implementation programs shall be provided through
pre-application conferences, written material, study sessions or other
appropriate means. Application and implementation fees for specific plans shall
be as set by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 95-06, passed 4-24-95)
§ 153.311 SPECIFIC PLAN CONTENTS.
   (A)   State law requirements. State law specifies at Cal. Gov't Code § 65451
the matters which must be included in a specific plan:
      “(A)   A specific plan shall include a text and diagram or diagrams which
specify all of the following in detail:
         (1)   The distribution, location and extent of the uses of land,
including open space, within the area covered by the plan.
         (2)   The proposed distribution, location and extent and intensity of
major components of public and private transportation, sewage, water, drainage,
solid waste disposal, energy and other essential facilities proposed to be
located within the area covered by the plan and needed to support the land uses
described in the plan.
         (3)   Standards and criteria by which development will proceed and
standards for the conservation, development and utilization of natural
resources where applicable.
         (4)   A program of implementation measures including regulations,
programs, public works projects and financing measures necessary to carry out
divisions (1), (2) and (3) above.
      (B)   The specific plan shall include a statement of the specific plan to
the general plan.”
   (B)   City requirements.
      (1)   The city's requirements include the state requirements listed above
but in sufficient depth, scope and detail to provide not only policies for the
development of the area but also specific standards for regulating that
development.
      (2)   A specific plan must include the following:
         (a)   The proposed land uses for all areas covered by the plan.
         (b)   The location of and types of streets.
         (c)   Public facilities and infrastructure required to serve
developments within the specific plan area.
         (d)   Proposed conservation open space and/or recreation areas, if
any.
         (e)   Financial and economic analysis.
      (3)   To meet the goal of tailoring general plan implementation to a
specific area, no one format is prescribed, but the text and diagrams prepared
must be organized in a manner that clearly states the goals of the specific
plan and clearly sets forth regulations in a format readily usable by both
professional and lay persons who may have a role in implementing the specific
plan. The Planning Department shall provide a checklist and examples of
specific plan contents to assist applicants.
(Ord. 95-06, passed 4-24-95)
§ 153.312 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW.
   It is anticipated, under the California Environmental Quality Act (Cal. Pub.
Res. Code §§ 21000 et seq.) and guidelines, that most specific plans will
require preparation of an environmental impact report. Once certified, the EIR
for a specific plan may be relied upon for further entitlements to the extent
allowed by the law, sought subsequent to adoption of the specific plan.
(Ord. 95-06, passed 4-24-95)
§ 153.313 AMENDMENT.
   A specific plan may be amended as necessary under the same procedure as
adoption of a specific plan.
(Ord. 95-06, passed 4-24-95)
§ 153.314 EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION.
   Since specific plan applications are flexible, expiration will be determined
on a case-by-case basis. Like other city regulations, most specific plan
approvals will not expire unless replaced by a subsequently adopted specific
plan or rendered obsolete by adoption of a conflicting general plan
designation. In some cases, however, limiting the duration an approval may be
appropriate when the specific plan is linked to another entitlement which
expires (that is, much as a tentative subdivision map). The resolution adopting
a specific plan shall specify the duration of the specific plan and any means
of extension, which may include an evaluation of an applicant's due diligence
in satisfying specific plan provisions.
(Ord. 95-06, passed 4-24-95)
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
§ 153.325 PURPOSE.
   This section provides standards by which the city shall evaluate and
ministerially approve an application for the siting and construction of an
accessory dwelling unit (ADU) or junior accessory dwelling unit (JADU) on a lot
with an existing or proposed dwelling located in areas zoned to allow single-
family or multifamily residential uses in compliance with Cal. Gov't Code §§
65852.2 and 65852.22, as may be amended.
(Ord. 2021-007, passed 12-14-21)
§ 153.326 PERMITTED LOCATIONS AND TYPES.
   (A)   ADUs are permitted in all zone districts allowing single-family or
multifamily residential uses on lots developed with existing or proposed
dwellings.
   (B)   An ADU may be established in the following methods:
      (1)   Attached to, or located within, an existing or proposed primary
dwelling.
      (2)   A new detached structure, or located within or attached to an
accessory structure, including detached garages or similar structures.
      (3)   Conversion of existing attached or detached accessory structures,
including garages, storage areas, or similar structures.
      (4)   Reconstruction of an existing structure or living area that is
proposed to be converted to an ADU, or a portion thereof, in the same location
and to the same dimensions and setbacks as the existing structure.
   (C)   One ADU and one JADU may be established per lot with a proposed or
existing single-family if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The ADU or JADU is within the proposed space of a single-family
dwelling or existing space of a single-family dwelling or accessory structure
and may include an expansion of not more than 150 square feet beyond the same
physical dimensions as the existing accessory structure. An expansion beyond
the physical dimensions of the existing accessory structure shall be limited to
accommodating ingress and egress.
      (2)   The space has exterior access from the proposed or existing single-
family dwelling.
      (3)   The side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire and safety.
   (D)   One JADU may be established within the space of an existing or
proposed single-family residence, on a lot that is zoned to allow single-family
residential uses.
   (E)   A JADU may be established within the space of the primary dwelling in
combination with the construction of one detached, new construction ADU not
exceeding 1,200 square feet and a height of 16 feet with four-foot side and
rear yard setbacks.
   (F)   ADUs shall be permitted on lots developed with existing multifamily
dwellings subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   A minimum of one ADU may be constructed, or up to 25% of the
existing unit count, within non-livable space, including, but not limited to,
storage rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or closets.
      (2)   The construction of two detached ADUs, subject to a maximum height
of 16 feet, and four-foot side and rear setbacks. In this case, only two
detached ADUs are permitted on lots developed with existing multifamily
dwellings.
(Ord. 2021-007, passed 12-14-21)
§ 153.327 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   ADUs shall comply with the following development standards:
      (1)   ADU type, location and size.
         (a)   Attached unit. An ADU attached to an existing primary dwelling
shall not exceed 50% of the total existing or proposed living area of the
primary dwelling.
         (b)   Detached unit. An ADU structurally independent and detached from
the existing or proposed primary dwelling shall not exceed 1,200 square feet.
         (c)   ADUs shall have independent exterior access from the primary
dwelling. No passageway to the primary dwelling shall be required.
         (d)   ADUs shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers if they
were not required for the primary residence.
      (2)   JADU Location, Size, and Standards.
         (a)   A JADU shall be constructed entirely within an existing or
proposed primary dwelling and shall not exceed 500 square feet.
         (b)   JADUs shall have an independent exterior entrance from the
primary dwelling but may also include shared access between two units.
         (c)   A JADU, at a minimum, shall include an efficiency kitchen as
defined in §
153.003.
         (d)   The property owner shall reside in either the principal dwelling
unit or the junior accessory dwelling unit.
         (e)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the JADU, the
property owner shall file with the city a deed restriction for recordation with
the County Recorder, which shall run with the land and include provisions
listed in Cal. Gov't Code § 65852.22 and state the following:
            The property contains an approved accessory dwelling unit pursuant
to
Chapter 153 of the Riverbank Municipal Code and is subject to the restrictions
and regulations set forth in that chapter. These restrictions and regulations
generally address development regulations, owner occupancy, and lease
requirements, limitations on the size of the accessory dwelling unit and
parking requirements. Current restrictions and regulations may be obtained from
the city of Riverbank planning division. These restrictions and regulations
shall be binding upon any successor in ownership of the property.
      (3)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Have minimum interior side and rear setbacks of four feet and
street side setback of ten feet.
         (b)   No setback shall be required for an existing living are or
accessory structure in the same location and to the same dimensions as an
existing structure that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit or to a
portion of an ADU, and a setback of no more than four feet from the side and
rear lot lines shall be required for an ADU that is not converted from an
existing structure or a new structure constructed in the same location and to
the same dimensions as an existing structure.
         (c)   Setback from structures. Setback from other structures on the
parcel shall be consistent with the city-adopted building code.
      (4)   Height. Not to exceed one story or 16 feet in height, except that
an ADU may be constructed above a garage to a maximum height of 35 feet.
      (5)   Location on parcel. An ADU shall be located within the side or rear
yard of the parcel. An ADU shall not be located within the front yard setback.
   (B)   Compatibility. The ADU should be designed and constructed to be
compatible with the existing house as to height, style, materials, and colors.
   (C)   Access. Doorway access shall be provided either to the side or the
rear of the ADU. Direct doorway access to the front yard is prohibited.
   (D)   Off-street parking.
      (1)   At least one additional off-street parking space shall be provided
for the ADU or per bedroom, whichever is less, unless otherwise exempt under §
153.327(E).
      (2)   The parking spaces required for the ADU can be in tandem to the
required off-street parking of the main dwelling unit, may be uncovered, and
can be located within the front yard setback as long as all other yard
requirements are met.
      (3)   When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished
in conjunction with the construction of an ADU or converted to an ADU, those
off-street parking spaces are not required to be replaced.
   (E)   Off-street parking exemption. Off-street parking shall not be imposed
in any of the following instances:
      (1)   The ADU is located within one-half mile walking distance of public
transit.
      (2)   The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically
significant historic district.
      (3)   The ADU is part of the existing primary residence or an existing
accessory structure.
      (4)   When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the
occupant of the ADU.
      (5)   When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the
ADU.
   (F)   Mobile homes or manufactured housing. Mobile homes or manufactured
housing on permanent foundations shall be permitted as an ADU, only if they are
installed on permanent foundations, the mobile home complies with the 1974
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act, and is ten years or
newer. Recreational vehicles, including but not limited to motor homes, travel
trailers, tent trailers, fifth wheel trailers, and house boats do not quality
as an ADU as defined in this section.
   (G)   Density. An accessory dwelling or junior accessory dwelling unit is
not considered to increase the density of the lot upon which it is located and
is a residential use that is consistent with the existing general plan and
zoning designation for the lot.
   (H)   Zoning and building requirements. The ADU shall comply with other
zoning and building requirements generally applicable to residential
construction in the applicable zone where the property is located.
(Ord. 2021-007, passed 12-14-21)
§ 153.328 UTILITIES AND IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Utility service. Adequate roadways, public utilities and services
shall be available to serve the ADU. ADUs shall not be considered new
residential uses for the purposes of calculating connection fees or capacity
charges for sewer and water. Installation of a separate direct connection
between an ADU contained within an existing structure and the utility shall not
be required. ADUs not within an existing structure shall be required to install
a new or separate utility connection and be charged a connection fee and/or
capacity charge. These charges shall be proportionate to the burden imposed by
the ADU on the water or sewer system based on either its size or number of
plumbing fixtures as determined by the city.
   (B)   Impact fees. Impact fees charged for the construction of ADUs shall be
consistent with Cal. Gov't Code § 65852.2(f).
(Ord. 2021-007, passed 12-14-21)
§ 153.329 OWNER OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Owner occupancy. If the owner occupies the primary residential unit,
the owner may rent the ADU to one party. If the owner occupies the ADU, the
owner may rent the primary residential unit to one party. The owner may rent
both the primary residential unit and the ADU together to one party who may not
further sublease any unit(s) or portion(s) thereof. The owner shall be a
signatory to any lease for the rented unit, for which the city may reasonably
require a copy of to verify compliance with this chapter and shall be the
applicant for any permit issued under this chapter. Owner occupancy for the
primary dwelling or the ADU is not required for ADUs approved between January
2020 and January 2025. The rental of the ADU shall be longer than 30 days.
   (B)   Ownership. The ADU shall not be sold or held under a different legal
ownership than the primary residence; nor shall the lot containing the ADU be
subdivided.
(Ord. 2021-007, passed 12-14-21)
§ 153.330 PROCESS AND TIMING.
   (A)   Approval process. An ADU or JADU is considered and approved
ministerially, without discretionary review or hearing, if it meets the minimum
standards in this chapter.
   (B)   Timing. The city must act on an application to create an ADU or JADU
within 60 days from the date that the city receives a completed application,
unless either:
      (1)   The applicant requests a delay, in which case the 60-day time
period is tolled for the period of the requested delay; or
      (2)   In the case of a JADU and the application to create a JADU is
submitted with a permit application to create a new single-family dwelling on a
lot, the city may delay acting on the permit application for the JADU until the
city acts on the permit application to create a new single-family dwelling, but
the application to create a JADU will still be considered ministerially without
discretionary review or a hearing.
(Ord. 2021-007, passed 12-14-21)
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
§ 153.335 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish general guidelines for
the siting of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals of this
subchapter are to:
      (1)   Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
      (2)   Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and
publicly-owned lands;
      (3)   Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
      (4)   Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as
a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
      (5)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
      (6)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through
careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging
techniques;
      (7)   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently;
      (8)   Consider the public health and safety of communication towers;
      (9)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; and
      (10)   Protect the aesthetic entrance and corridors of the community.
   (B)   In furtherance of these goals, the city shall give due consideration
to the general plan and specific plans of the city, zoning map, existing land
uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location
of towers and antennas.
(Ord. 99-07, passed 6-28-99)
§ 153.336 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth.
   ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE. Includes man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
   ANTENNA. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
   BACKHAUL NETWORK. The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to
one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance
providers, or the public switched telephone network.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   HEIGHT. When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured
from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or
other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
   PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS. Any tower or antenna for which
a building permit or special use permit has been properly issued prior to the
effective date of this subchapter, including permitted towers or antennas that
have not yet been constructed, so long as such approval is current and not
expired.
   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar
communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers,
or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative
tower structures, and the like. This term includes the structure and any
support thereto.
(Ord. 99-07, passed 6-28-99)
§ 153.337 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in the city and
its sphere of influence shall be subject to these regulations, except as
provided in divisions (B) through (D) of this section.
   (B)   Amateur radio station operators, receive-only antennas. This
subchapter shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that
is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed
amateur radio station operator, or is used exclusively for receive-only
antennas.
   (C)   Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this subchapter,
other than the requirements of
§ 153.338(F) and (G).
   (D)   AM array. For purposes of implementing this subchapter, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which
functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower.
Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the
outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units
may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by conditional use permit.
(Ord. 99-07, passed 6-28-99)
§ 153.338 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or
tower on the lot.
   (B)   Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including but
not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such
requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the
antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within the lot.
   (C)   Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or
tower shall provide to the Community Development Director an inventory of its
existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are
either within the jurisdiction of the city and its sphere of influence or
within one mile of the border thereof; including specific information about the
location, height, and design of each tower. The Community Development Director
may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative
approvals or conditional use permits under this subchapter or other
organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the city
and its sphere-of-influence, provided, however that the Community Development
Director is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or
warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
   (D)   Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements
and are subject to review and approval by the city:
      (1)   Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject
to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to
reduce visual obtrusiveness. The finish shall be subject to the Community
Development Director's approval where administrative permits are considered and
by the Planning Commission where conditional use permits are required.
      (2)   At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding
buildings.
      (3)   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral
color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the
supporting structure, so as to make the antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.
   (E)   Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
   (F)   State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the
state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas.
If any standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and
antennas governed by this subchapter shall bring the towers and antennas into
compliance with the revised standards and regulations within six months of the
effective date of the standards and regulations, unless a different compliance
schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to
bring towers and antennas into compliance with revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at
the owner's expense.
   (G)   Building Codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes
and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic
Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the
city concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and
constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon notice being provided
to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring the tower into
compliance with such standards. Failure to bring the tower into compliance
within 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna
at the owner's expense.
   (H)   Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in
the city and its sphere of influence, irrespective of municipal and county
jurisdictional boundaries.
   (I)   Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this subchapter and shall not be regulated or permitted
as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
   (J)   Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall
certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or
operation of a wireless communication system in the city and its sphere of
influence have been obtained, and shall file a copy of all required franchises
with the Community Development Director.
   (K)   Public notice. For purposes of this subchapter, any conditional use
permit, variance request, or appeal of an administratively approved use or
conditional use shall require public notice to all abutting property owners and
all property owners of properties that are located within the corresponding
separation distance listed in
§ 153.341(B)(5)(b),
Table 2, in addition to any notice otherwise required by this chapter.
   (L)   Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
   (M)    Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of §
153.342.
   (N)   Multiple antenna/tower plan. The city strongly encourages the users of
towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple
towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall
be given priority in the review process.
(Ord. 99-07, passed 6-28-99) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.339 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted
uses and shall not require administrative approval or a conditional use permit.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted:
antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled
by the city, provided a license or lease authorizing the antenna or tower has
been approved by the city.
(Ord. 99-07, passed 6-28-99)
§ 153.340 ADMINISTRATIVELY APPROVED USES.
   (A)   General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
administrative approvals for towers and antennas:
      (1)   The Community Development Director may administratively approve the
uses listed in this section.
      (2)   Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the
Community Development Director, providing the information set forth in §
153.341(B)(1) and
(B)(3), and a non-refundable fee as established by resolution of City Council
to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing the application.
      (3)   The Community Development Director shall review the application for
administrative approval and determine if the proposed use complies with §§
153.338 and
153.341(B)(4) and
(B)(5) of this subchapter.
      (4)   The Community Development Director shall respond to each
application within 60 days after receiving a complete application by either
approving, conditionally approving or disapproving the application. If the
Community Development Director fails to respond to the applicant within 60
days, then the application shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for
consideration.
      (5)   In connection with any administrative approval, the Community
Development Director may, in order to encourage shared use, administratively
waive any zoning district setback requirements as set forth in §
153.341(B)(4), or separation distances between towers as set forth in §
153.341(B)(5) by up to 50%.
      (6)   In connection with any administrative approval, the Community
Development Director may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles,
administratively allow the reconstruction of an existing tower to monopole
construction.
      (7)   If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file
an application for a conditional use permit pursuant to §
153.341 prior to filing any appeal that may be available under the Zoning
Ordinance.
   (B)   List of administratively approved uses. The following uses may be
approved by the Community Development Director after conducting an
administrative review:
      (1)   Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional
buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with the tower or
antenna, in any M-1, M-2, or C-M Zone District.
      (2)   Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with
the terms of divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)(2)(b) below.
         (a)   Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not
attached to a tower may be approved by the Community Development Director as an
accessory use to any commercial, industrial, professional, institutional, or
multi-family structure of eight or more dwelling units, provided:
            1.   The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above the
highest point of the structure;
            2.   The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
            3.   The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
         (b)   Antennas on existing towers. An antenna which is attached to an
existing tower may be approved by the Community Development Director and, to
minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and
clustering of towers, colocation of antennas by more than one carrier on
existing towers shall take precedence over the construction of new towers,
provided colocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with the following:
            1.   A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the
colocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the
existing tower, unless the Community Development Director allows reconstruction
as a monopole.
            2.   Height.
               a.   An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller
height, not to exceed 30 feet over the tower's existing height, to accommodate
the colocation of an additional antenna.
               b.   The height change referred to above may only occur one time
per communication tower.
               c.   The additional height referred to above shall not require
an additional distance separation as set forth in
§ 153.341. The tower's pre-modification height shall be used to calculate such
distance separations.
            3.   Onsite location.
               a.   A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the
colocation of an additional antenna may be moved onsite within 50 feet of its
existing location.
               b.   After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate colocation, only
one tower may remain on the site.
               c.   A relocated onsite tower shall continue to be measured from
the original tower location for purposes of calculating separation distances
between towers pursuant to §
153.341(B)(5). The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in no way be deemed to
cause a violation of §
153.341(B)(5).
               d.   The onsite relocation of a tower which comes within the
separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned lands as
established in §
153.341(B)(5) shall only be permitted when approved by the Community
Development Director.
      (3)   New towers in nonresidential zoning districts. Locating any new
tower in a nonresidential zoning district other than M-1, M-2, and C-M,
provided a licensed professional engineer certifies the tower can structurally
accommodate the number of shared users proposed by the applicant; the Community
Development Director concludes the tower is in conformity with the goals set
forth in §
153.335 and the requirements of §
153.338; the tower meets the setback requirements set forth in §
153.341(B)(4) and separation distances set forth in §
153.341(B)(5); and the tower meets the following height and usage criteria:
         (a)   For a single user, up to 70 feet in height;
         (b)   For two users, up to 90 feet in height; and
         (c)   For three or more users, up to 100 feet in height.
      (4)   Locating any alternative tower structure in a zoning district other
than M-1, M-2, or C-M, that in the judgment of the Community Development
Director is in conformity with the goals set forth in §
153.335.
      (5)   Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple
low-powered transmitters/ receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such
as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not
require the use of towers.
   (C)   Submittal requirements. Applicant shall submit, as a minimum, the
following: information as required by §
153.341(A)(4),
(B)(1), and
(B)(3) through (B)(7).
(Ord. 99-07, passed 6-28-99) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.341 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
conditional use permits for towers or antennas by the Planning Commission:
      (1)   If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under §
153.339, or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to §
153.340, a conditional use permit shall be required for the construction of a
tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts.
      (2)   Applications for conditional use permit under this section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of §
153.216, except as modified in this section.
      (3)   In granting a conditional use permit, the Planning Commission may
impose conditions to the extent the Planning Commission concludes such
conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower
on adjoining properties.
      (4)   Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a
licensed professional engineer.
      (5)   An applicant for a conditional use permit shall submit the
information described in this section, and a non-refundable fee as established
by resolution of the City Council, to reimburse the city for the costs of
reviewing the application.
   (B)   Towers.
      (1)   Information required. In addition to any information required for
applications for conditional use permits pursuant to §
153.216, applicants for a conditional use permit for a tower shall submit the
following information:
         (a)   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses
and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), general plan
designation of the site and all properties within the applicable separation
distances set forth in division
(B)(5) of this section, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks
from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower, and any other
structures, topography, parking, and other information deemed by the Community
Development Director to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter.
         (b)   Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
         (c)   The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and non-subdivided
residentially zoned properties.
         (d)   The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to §
153.338
(C) shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also
identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/
operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
         (e)   A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
         (f)   Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
         (g)   A description of compliance with §
153.338(C) through (G), (J), (L) and (M), §
153.341(B)(4) and
(B)(5), and all applicable federal, state or local laws.
         (h)   A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate colocation of additional antennas
for future users.
         (i)   Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network
for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or
operated by the applicant in the municipality.
         (j)   A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers,
other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or
structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the
proposed new tower.
         (k)   A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the city and its sphere of influence based upon existing
physical, engineering, technological or geographical limitations, in the event
the proposed tower is erected.
      (2)   Factors considered in granting conditional use permits for towers.
In addition to any standards for consideration of conditional use permit
applications pursuant to §
153.216, Use Permits, the Planning Commission shall consider the following
factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit, although the
Planning Commission may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or
more of these criteria if the Planning Commission concludes that the goals of
this subchapter are better served thereby:
         (a)   Height of the proposed tower;
         (b)   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
         (c)   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
         (d)   Surrounding topography;
         (e)   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
         (f)   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
         (g)   Proposed ingress and egress; and
         (h)   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as
discussed in §
153.341(B)(3).
      (3)   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Commission that no
existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the
use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna.
An applicant shall submit information requested by the Planning Commission
related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing
tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's
proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:
         (a)   No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet applicant's engineering requirements.
         (b)   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineering requirements.
         (c)   Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
         (d)   The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antennas on the existing towers or structures, or the
antennas on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed antenna.
         (e)   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower
or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower
development are presumed to be unreasonable.
         (f)   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
         (g)   The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell
network using multiple low-powered transmitters/ receivers attached to a
wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new
tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology
unsuitable.
      (4)   Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers for which a conditional use permit is required; provided, however, that
the Planning Commission may reduce the standard setback requirements if the
goals of this subchapter would be better served thereby:
         (a)   Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 75% of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
         (b)   Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
      (5)   Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to
all towers and antennas for which a conditional use permit is required;
provided, however, that the Planning Commission may reduce the standard
separation requirements if the goals of this subchapter would be better served
thereby:
         (a)   Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
            1.   Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower
to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated areas as specified in
Table 1, except as otherwise provided in Table 1.
            2.   Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards established in
Table 1.
 
Table 1 - Separation Requirements
Off-site Use/Designated Area              Separation
Single family or duplex residential units 200 feet or 300% height of tower,
1                                         whichever is greater
Vacant single-family or duplex
residentially zoned land which is either  200 feet or 300% height of tower, 2
platted or has preliminary subdivision    whichever is greater
plan approval which is not expired
Vacant non-subdivided residentially zoned 100 feet or 100% height of tower,
lands 3                                   whichever is greater
Existing multi-family residential units   100 feet or 100% height of tower,
greater than duplex units                 whichever is greater
Nonresidentially zoned lands or           None; only setbacks apply
nonresidential uses
 
Notes:      1:   Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for living
purposes.
      2:   Separation measured from base of tower to closest building setback
line.
      3:   Includes any undivided residential use properties without a valid
preliminary subdivision plan or valid development plan approval, and any multi-
family residentially zoned land greater than duplex.
         (b)   Separation distances between towers.
            1.   Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for
and measured between the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation
distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the
base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of
the proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be
as shown in
Table 2.
 
Table 2 - Separation Distances
Existing Towers - Types
                      Lattice* Guyed Monopole 75 feet in Monopole less than 75
                                     height or greater   feet in height
Lattice               5,000    5,000 1,500               750
Guyed                 5,000    5,000 1,500               750
Monopole 75 feet in   1,500    1,500 1,500               750
height or greater
Monopole less than 75 750      750   750                 750
feet in height
 
Note:   *   Lattice towers are strongly discouraged.
      (6)   Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing,
type to be approved by the Community Development Director, not less than six
feet in height, and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing
device; provided however, that the Planning Commission may waive such
requirements as it deems appropriate.
      (7)   Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a conditional use permit is required;
provided, however, that the Planning Commission may waive such requirements if
the goals of this subchapter would be better served thereby.
         (a)   Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property
used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at
least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
         (b)   In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived.
         (c)   Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as
towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property
perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
(Ord. 99-07, passed 6-28-99) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.342 BUILDINGS OR OTHER EQUIPMENT STORAGE.
   (A)   Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment cabinet or
structure used in association with antennas shall comply with the following,
unless modified by the Community Development Director:
      (1)   The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than ten square
feet of gross floor area or be more than three feet in height. In addition, for
buildings and structures which are less than 65 feet in height, the related
unmanned equipment structure, if over ten square feet of gross floor area or
three feet in height, shall be located on the ground and shall not be located
on the roof of the structure.
      (2)   If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building,
the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and structures shall
not occupy more than 2% of the roof area and must be screened from public view.
      (3)   Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
   (B)   Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be located in
accordance with the following:
      (1)   In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may be
located:
         (a)   In a front or side yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no
greater than three feet in height or ten square feet of gross floor area, and
the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of five feet or more from all lot
lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an
ultimate height of at least 42 to 48 inches, and a planted height of at least
36 inches.
         (b)   In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater
than three feet in height or ten square feet in gross floor area. The cabinet/
structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of
eight feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
      (2)   In commercial or industrial districts, the equipment cabinet or
structure shall be no greater than three feet in height or ten square feet in
gross floor area. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by an evergreen
hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of at least 36
inches. In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from
view of all residential properties which abut or are directly across the street
from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence eight feet in height or an
evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of
at least 36 inches.
   (C)   Antennas located on towers. The related unmanned equipment structure
shall not contain more than three feet in height or ten square feet of gross
floor area or be more than those dimensions, and shall be located in accordance
with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which located.
   (D)   Modification of building size requirements. The requirements of
divisions (A) through (C) of this section may be modified by the Community
Development Director in the case of administratively approved uses or by the
Planning Commission in the case of uses permitted by conditional use permit to
encourage colocation.
(Ord. 99-07, passed 6-28-99) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.343 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.
   Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of the antenna or tower
shall remove the tower or antenna within 90 days of receipt of notice from the
city and/or its sphere of influence notifying the owner of such abandonment.
Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within the 90-day period shall
be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are
two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the tower.
(Ord. 99-07, passed 6-28-99)
§ 153.344 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Not expansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are constructed and
antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming
use or structure.
   (B)   Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement
with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be permitted on such
preexisting towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a
preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this subchapter.
   (C)   Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas.
Notwithstanding the provisions of §
153.343, bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or
destroyed by natural causes may be rebuilt without having to first obtain
administrative approval or a conditional use permit and without having to meet
the separation requirements specified in §
153.341(B)(4) and
(B)(5). The type, height, and location of the tower on-site shall be of the
same type and intensity as the original facility approval. Building permits to
rebuild the facility shall comply with the then-applicable building codes, and
shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged or
destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if the permit expires, the tower or
antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in §
153.343.
(Ord. 99-07, passed 6-28-99)
RETAIL SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 153.360 PURPOSE.
   The general purposes of the alcoholic beverage sales regulations are to
protect and promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience,
prosperity, and general welfare by requiring that alcoholic beverage sales
commercial activities achieve the following objectives:
   (A)   To protect residential, commercial, industrial, and civic areas and
minimize the adverse impacts of nonconforming and incompatible uses;
   (B)   To provide opportunities for alcoholic beverage sale activities to
operate in a mutually beneficial relationship to each other and to other
commercial and civic services;
   (C)   To provide mechanisms to address problems often associated with the
public consumption of alcoholic beverages, such as litter, loitering, graffiti,
unruly behavior and escalated noise levels;
   (D)   To provide that alcoholic beverage sale commercial activities are not
the source of undue public nuisances in the community;
   (E)   To provide for properly maintained alcoholic beverage sale
establishments so that negative impacts generated by these activities are not
harmful to the surrounding environment in any way;
   (F)   To monitor that deemed approved activities do not substantially change
in mode or character of operation.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
§ 153.361 USE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Use permits shall be required for the sale of alcoholic beverages, including
beer and wine, for on or off-site consumption. In determining whether to issue
a use permit, the city shall apply appropriate conditions to the use permit
that insure compliance with the intent of this chapter. Upon issuance of a use
permit, an alcoholic beverage sale activity shall be considered deemed approved
and subject to the conditions herein.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
§ 153.362 APPLICABILITY OF DEEMED APPROVED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   To which property applicable. The deemed approved alcoholic beverage
sale regulations shall apply, to the extent permissible under other laws, to
all legal nonconforming alcoholic beverage sale commercial activities within
the city.
   (B)   Duplicated regulation. Whenever any provision of the deemed approved
alcoholic beverage sale regulations and any other provision of law, whether set
forth in this code, or in any other law, ordinance, or resolution of any kind,
imposes overlapping or contradictory regulations, or contain restrictions
covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is more
restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control, except as otherwise
expressly provided in the deemed approved alcoholic beverage sale regulations.
   (C)   Relationship to the zoning regulations. The nonconforming use
provisions of the zoning regulations including, but not limited to, §§
153.195,
153.196,
153.197,
153.198,
153.199,
153.200,
153.201,
153.202 and
153.203, shall apply to the deemed approved alcoholic beverage sale
regulations.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
§ 153.363 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid
or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, which contains one-half of
one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes
either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances, and
sales of which requires a State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control
license.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY.  The retail sale, for on- or
off- premises consumption, of liquor, beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages,
excluding full-service restaurants that comply with the below-listed definition
of full service restaurant.
   CONDITION OF APPROVAL. A requirement, which must be carried out by the
activity in order to retain its deemed approved status.
   DEEMED APPROVED ACTIVITY. Any legal nonconforming alcoholic beverage sales
commercial activity, as defined in this section, in existence immediately prior
to the effective date of the deemed approved alcoholic beverage sale
regulations shall be considered a DEEMED APPROVED ACTIVITY as long as it
complies with the deemed approved performance standards as set forth in
§ 153.364, and shall no longer be considered a legal nonconforming activity.
   DEEMED APPROVED STATUS.  The status conferred upon a deemed approved
activity. DEEMED APPROVED STATUS replaces legal nonconforming status.
   FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT. A place which is regularly and in a bona fide
manner used and kept open for the serving of at least lunch and dinner to
guests for compensation and which has suitable kitchen facilities connected
therewith, containing conveniences for cooking an assortment of foods which may
be required for such meals. The sale or service of sandwiches (whether prepared
in a kitchen or made elsewhere and heated up on the premises) or snack foods
shall not constitute a FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT. To be considered a FULL SERVICE
RESTAURANT under the deemed approved program, the establishment must meet the
following criteria:
      (1)   A FULL SERVICE RESTAURANT shall serve meals to guests at all times
the establishment is open for business. An establishment shall not be
considered a FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT if it served alcohol without meal service
being provided with the exception that alcohol sales to restaurant patrons may
continue for up to two hours after meal service has ceased to allow guests to
comfortably complete their meals.
      (2)   There shall be a real offer or holding out to sell meals. Premises
shall make an offer or holding out of sales of meals to the public by
maintaining and displaying a printed menu and/or a menu board. A two-thirds
majority of the items offered on the menu shall be available at any given time
the establishment is open. The mere offering of meals without actual sales
shall not be deemed sufficient.
      (3)   The offer of meals is not adequate to meet the above criteria. A
FULL SERVICE RESTAURANT shall make actual and substantial sales of meals to
guests for compensation. Substantial sales shall mean that no less than 60% of
total revenue shall be generated from food service and no more than 40% of
revenue from the sales of alcohol.
      (4)   “Meals” means the usual assortment of foods commonly ordered at
various times of the day for the cuisine served. The service of snack foods
and/or appetizers alone shall not be deemed compliance with this requirement.
Meals shall be prepared on the premises. Heating of food prepared elsewhere
shall not constitute a meal for the purposes of this policy.
      (5)   Premises shall be equipped for meal service and maintained in good
faith. Premises must possess and maintain appliances for the cooking of a
variety of foods such as stoves, ovens, broilers, or other devices, as well as
pots, pans, or containers that can be used for cooking. Premises shall possess
the necessary utensils, table service, and condiment dispensers with which to
serve meals to the public.
      (6)   A FULL SERVICE RESTAURANT shall comply with all local health
department standards.
      (7)   A FULL SERVICE RESTAURANT may have a separate lounge or bar area
provided that the restaurant and bar/lounge area operate as a single entity.
The physical layout, entry location(s),  spatial connection between the areas,
and operational characteristics, among other factors, shall be used to
determine compliance. Any bar/lounge area cannot remain open when the dining
area is closed. However, the dining area may be open while the bar/lounge area
is closed.
      (8)   To the extent that ABC regulations do not conflict with the above
criteria, a FULL SERVICE RESTAURANT shall comply with all State Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control regulations related to "Bona fide public eating
place, meals."
   ILLEGAL ACTIVITY. An activity which has been finally determined to be in
noncompliance with the deemed approved performance standards of this chapter.
Such an activity shall lose its deemed approved status and shall no longer be
considered a deemed approved activity.
   LEGAL NONCONFORMING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY or LEGAL
NONCONFORMING ACTIVITY. An alcoholic beverage sales commercial activity which
was a nonconforming use pursuant to the nonconforming use regulations, and for
which a valid state of California Alcoholic Beverage Control license had been
issued and used in the exercise of the rights and privileges conferred by the
license, at a time immediately prior to the effective date of the deemed
approved alcoholic beverage sale regulations. Such an activity shall be
considered a deemed approved activity, and shall no longer be considered a
LEGAL NONCONFORMING ACTIVITY, except such activity shall be subject to those
zoning regulations relating to nonconforming uses, as of the effective date of
the alcoholic beverage sale regulations.
   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.  Regulations prescribed in the performance standards
of this chapter.
   PREMISES. The actual space within a building devoted to alcoholic beverage
sales.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
§ 153.364 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND DEEMED APPROVED ACTIVITIES.
   An activity shall retain its deemed approved status only if it conforms with
all of the following deemed approved performance standards:
   (A)   That it does not result in adverse effects to the health, peace, or
safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area;
   (B)   That it does not result in jeopardizing or endangering the public
health or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area;
   (C)   That it does not result in repeated nuisance activities within the
premises or in close proximity of the premises, including but not limited to
disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking
in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen
goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism,
excessive littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud
noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic
violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or police detentions and arrests;
   (D)   That it does not result in violations to any applicable provision of
any other city, state, or federal regulation, ordinance or statute;
   (E)   That its upkeep and operating characteristics are compatible with and
will not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting
properties and the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
§ 153.365 AUTOMATIC DEEMED APPROVED STATUS.
   All alcoholic beverage sales commercial activities that were legal
activities immediately prior to the effective date of the alcoholic beverage
sale regulations shall automatically become deemed approved activities as of
the effective date of the regulations and shall no longer be considered legal
nonconforming activities. Each such deemed approved activity shall retain its
deemed approved status as long as it complies with the deemed approved
performance standards.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
§ 153.366 NOTIFICATION TO OWNERS OF DEEMED APPROVED ACTIVITIES.
   The Community Development Director shall notify the owner of each deemed
approved activity, and also the property owner if not the same, of the
activity’s deemed approved status. Such notice shall be sent via certified
return receipt mail and shall include a copy of the performance standards of
this chapter with the requirement that these be posted in a conspicuous and
unobstructed place visible from the entrance of the establishment for public
review, notification that the activity is required to comply with all these
same performance standards and that a review fee is required, and the amount of
such fee provided in the master fee schedule, and that the activity is required
to comply with all other aspects of the deemed approved alcoholic beverage sale
regulations. Should the notice be returned, the notice shall be sent via
regular U.S. Mail.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
§ 153.367 PROCEDURE FOR CONSIDERATION OF VIOLATIONS TO PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Upon receiving a complaint from the public, Police Department, or any
other interested party that a deemed approved activity is in violation of the
performance, and once it is determined by the city that violations appear to be
occurring, then the deemed approved status of the deemed approved activity in
question shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission at a public hearing.
Notification of the public hearing shall be in accordance with adopted city
standards.
   (B)   The purpose of the public hearing is to receive testimony on whether
the operating methods of the deemed approved activity are causing undue
negative impacts in the surrounding area. At the public hearing, the Planning
Commission shall determine whether the deemed approved activity conforms to the
deemed approved performance standards and to any other applicable criteria, and
may continue the deemed approved status for the activity in question or require
such changes or impose such reasonable conditions of approval as are in the
judgment of the Planning Commission necessary to ensure conformity to said
criteria and such conditions shall be based on the evidence before the Planning
Commission. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be based upon
information compiled by staff and testimony from the business owner and all
other interested parties. New conditions of approval shall be made a part of
the deemed approved status and the deemed approved activity shall be required
to comply with these conditions. The determination of the Planning Commission
shall become final ten calendar days after the date of decision unless appealed
to the City Council.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
§ 153.368 APPEAL ON THE REVOCATION OF A DEEMED APPROVED STATUS TO THE CITY
COUNCIL.
   (A)   Within ten calendar days after the date of a decision by the Planning
Commission to revoke a deemed approved status, an appeal from said decision may
be taken to the City Council by any interested party. In the event the last
date of appeal falls on a weekend or holiday when city offices are closed, the
next date such offices are open for business shall be the last date of appeal.
Such appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the Planning Commission and
shall be filed with the City Clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein
it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Commission or
wherein its decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. Upon
receipt of the appeal and an appeal fee in accordance with this section, the
Council shall set the date for consideration thereof. The City Clerk shall
notify the Secretary of the City Planning Commission of the receipt of said
appeal and of the date set for consideration thereof; and said Secretary shall,
not less than ten days prior thereto, give written notice to: the owner of the
deemed approved activity; the property owner; adverse party or parties, or to
the attorney, spokesperson, or representative of such party or parties; other
interested groups and neighborhood associations who have requested
notification; and to similar groups and individuals as the Secretary deems
appropriate, of the time, date, and place of the hearing on the appeal. In
considering the appeal, the Council shall determine whether the deemed approved
activity conforms to the applicable deemed approved performance standards, and
may approve or disapprove the revocation or require such changes therein or
impose such reasonable conditions of approval as are in its judgment necessary
to ensure conformity to said standards.
   (B)   The decision of the City Council shall be made by resolution and shall
be final. The City Council shall vote on the appeal within 30 days after its
first hearing of the appeal. If the Council is unable to decide the appeal at
that meeting, it shall appear for a vote on each regular meeting of the Council
thereafter until decided.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
§ 153.369 NOTIFICATION OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   The Community Development Director shall notify the owner of each deemed
approved activity, and also the property owner if not the same, of the time and
place of the public hearing. Such notice shall be sent via certified return
receipt mail and shall include notification that the deemed approved status of
the deemed approved activity will be considered before the Officer. The public
hearing shall be noticed by posting notices within 300 feet of the subject
property; notice shall also be given by mail or delivery to all persons shown
on the last available equalized assessment roll as owning real property in the
city within 300 feet of the subject property. All such notices shall be given
not less than ten days prior to the date set for the hearing, if such is to be
held. Fees for notification shall be in accordance with city regulations and
paid for by the deemed approved activity in question.
   (A)   Notice on site. A city-provided notice of 8 1/2 x 11 inches in
dimension shall also be posted on the premises of the subject activity, placed
in the window of the activity. (If a window facing the street is not present,
then the placard will be required to be posted onto the exterior of the
building.) All notices shall advertise the time, date, purpose, and location of
the public hearing for each particular site. All notices shall be given not
less than ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
   (B)   Notice by mail. Notice by mail is deemed given on the date the notice
is placed into the U.S. Mail system.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
§ 153.370 FEE SCHEDULE.
   Fees, and regulations pertaining to fees, including the review,
notification, appeal, and reinspection of deemed approved activities, shall be
in accordance with the city master fee schedule.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
§ 153.371 OFFICIAL ACTION.
   All officials, departments, and employees of the city vested with the
authority to issue permits, certificates, or licenses shall adhere to, and
require conformance with, the deemed approved alcoholic beverage sale
regulations.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
§ 153.372 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Infractions. Any person who violates, causes, or permits another
person to violate any provision of these regulations is guilty of an infraction
unless otherwise provided.
   (B)   Separate offenses for each day. Any violator shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any
violation of any provision of these regulations is committed, continued,
permitted, or caused by such violator and shall be punishable accordingly.
   (C)   Any violation a public nuisance. In addition to the penalties provided
in this section, any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be and is declared to be a
public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such by the city.
   (D)   Injunction as additional remedy. Any violation of any provision of
these regulations shall be and is declared to be contrary to the public
interest and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a cause of action for
injunctive relief.
   (E)   Penalties. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions
of this section shall be punishable by a fine to the maximum permitted under
state law. Any violation beyond the second conviction within a one-year period
may be charged by the City Attorney or District Attorney as a misdemeanor, and
the penalty for conviction shall be punishable by a fine or imprisonment to the
maximum permitted under state law.
   (F)   Liability for expenses. In addition to the punishment provided by law,
a violator is liable for such costs, expenses, and disbursements paid or
incurred by the city or any of its contractors in correction, abatement, and
prosecution of the violation. Reinspection fees to ascertain compliance with
previously noticed or cited violations shall be charged against the owner of
the deemed approved activity. Fees shall be in the amount of the actual city
cost shall be charged for reinspections. The inspection official shall give the
owner or other responsible party of such affected premises a written notice
showing the itemized cost of such chargeable service and requesting payment
thereof. Should the bill not be paid in the required time, the charges shall be
placed as a lien against the property.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
§ 153.373 ENFORCEMENT.
   The city shall designate the appropriate personnel to enforce the provisions
of these regulations.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
§ 153.374 INSPECTION AND RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The officials responsible for enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance, or their
duly authorized representatives, may enter on any site or into any structure
for the purpose of investigation, provided they shall do so in a reasonable
manner, whenever they have cause to suspect a violation of any provision of
these regulations, or whenever necessary to the investigation of violations to
the deemed approved performance standards or conditions of approval prescribed
in these regulations. An owner or occupant or agent thereof who refuses to
permit such entry and investigation shall be guilty of infringing upon the
violations and penalties as outlined in
§ 153.372 and subject to related penalties thereof.
(Ord. 2005-009, passed 6-13-05)
200-YEAR FLOOD PROTECTION
§ 153.380 INTENT.
   This section implements the requirements of Senate Bill 5 (2007) and related
legislation that prohibits approval of urban development in urban and
urbanizing areas that are exposed to 200-year flooding risk unless certain
findings are made. These requirements are established in the Cal. Gov’t Code §§
65865.5, 65962 and 66474.5, as amended.
(Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 153.381 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   200-YEAR FLOODPLAIN MAP. A map approved by the City Engineer for urban and
urbanizing areas that depicts geographic areas that may be exposed to 200-year
frequency flooding, and, if available, the depth of flooding during a 200-year
flooding event.
   200-YEAR FREQUENCY FLOODING. The level of flooding that has a 1-in-200
chance of occurring in any given year using criteria consistent with, or
developed by, the California Department of Water Resources.
   ADEQUATE PROGRESS. Defined in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65007.
   FLOOD HAZARD ZONE. An area subject to flooding as delineated as either a
special hazard area or an area of moderate or minimal hazard on an official
flood insurance rate map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), as also defined in §
151.48.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. 
      (1)   A development agreement; or
      (2)   A tentative subdivision map, or a parcel map for which a tentative
map was not required; or
      (3)   A discretionary permit or other discretionary entitlement that
would result in the construction of a new building or construction that would
result in an increase in allowed occupancy for an existing building; or
      (4)   A ministerial permit that would result in the construction of a new
residence.
   URBAN AREAS AND URBANIZING AREAS. An urban area is a developed area in which
there are 10,000 residents or more (Cal. Gov’t Code § 65007(I)). An urbanizing
area is a developed area or an area outside a developed area that is planned or
anticipated to have 10,000 residents or more within the next ten years. (Cal.
Gov’t Code § 65007(m)).
   URBAN LEVEL OF FLOOD PROTECTION (ULOP). The level of protection that is
necessary to withstand 200-year frequency flooding. ULOP shall not mean shallow
flooding or flooding from local drainage that meets the criteria for the
national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection (Cal.
Gov’t Code § 65007).
(Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
§ 153.382 200-YEAR FLOOD PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT.
   After July 2, 2016, unless that date is amended by the State Legislature,
new development shall not be approved where 200-year flooding, as shown on a
200-year map, will exceed 3 feet in depth, or in a flood hazard zones where
200-year floodplain maps have not been approved by the City Engineer, unless
the approval authority determines based on substantial evidence in the record
that:
   (A)   The facilities of the State Plan of Flood Control or other flood
management facilities protect the new development site to the Urban Level of
Flood Protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal
Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in non-urbanizing
areas; or
   (B)   Conditions imposed on the new development will protect the property to
the Urban Level of Flood Protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the
national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in
non-urbanizing areas; or
   (C)   The local flood management agency has made adequate progress on the
construction of a flood protection system that will result in flood protection
equal to or greater than the urban level of flood protection in urban and
urbanizing areas, or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard
of flood protection in non-urbanizing areas.
   (D)   The new development site located in an undetermined risk area has met
the urban level of flood protection based on substantial evidence in the
record.
(Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-13-16)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
   Section
   
154.01   Purpose
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   Minimum proximity requirements
Cross-reference:
   Adult Entertainment Business Regulations, see Ch.
118
§ 154.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of this chapter to prevent community-wide adverse economic
impacts, increased crime, decreased property values, and the deterioration of
neighborhoods, which can be brought about by the concentration of adult
entertainment businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to other
incompatible uses, such as schools for minors, churches, and residentially
zoned districts or uses. The City Council finds that it has been demonstrated
in various communities that the concentration of adult entertainment businesses
causes an increase in the number of transients in the area, and an increase in
crime, and in addition to the effects described above, can cause other
businesses and residents to move elsewhere. It is, therefore, the purpose of
this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
concentration of adult entertainment businesses or their close proximity to
incompatible uses, while permitting the location of adult businesses in certain
areas.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES. Shall include any one of the following:
      (1)   ADULT ARCADE. An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar
machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films,
computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions, 30% or more of the number of which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment that has 30% or more of its stock
in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form
of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
and/or specified anatomical areas.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, restaurant, or similar business
establishment which:
         (a)    Regularly features live performances which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities; and/or
         (b)   Shows films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, 30% or more of the
number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (4)   ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL. A hotel or motel or similar business
establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration,
which:
         (a)   Provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
other photographic reproductions, 30% or more of the number of which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and
         (b)   Rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a 6-hour period,
or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period.
      (5)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business establishment where, for
any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides or similar photograph reproductions are shown, 30% or
more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (6)   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live
performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      (7)   MODELING STUDIO. A business which provides, for pecuniary
compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models
who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display specified
anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or
otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. MODELING STUDIO does
not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of
Education. MODELING STUDIO further does not include a studio or similar
facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of
artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available specified sexual
activities.
   CHURCH. A structure which is used primarily for religious worship and
related religious activities.
   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON. Shall mean and refer to
the dominant or essential theme of the object described by this phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon" the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are
those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of
the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. (See Pringle v. City of
Covina, 115 Cal. App. 3d 151 (1981))
   ESTABLISHMENT OF AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS. Shall mean and include any
of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any adult entertainment business as
a new business;
      (2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult
entertainment business, to any adult entertainment business defined herein;
      (3)   The addition of any of the adult entertainment businesses defined
herein to any other existing adult entertainment business.
   REGULARLY FEATURES. With respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret, means
a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occurs on two or more
occasions within a 30-day period; three or more occasions within a 60-day
period; or four or more occasions within a 180-day period, shall to the extent
permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.
   SCHOOL. Any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for
minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of
study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to
standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a
nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school,
senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not
include a vocation or professional institution of higher education, including a
community or junior college, college, or university.
   SEMI-NUDE. Means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by the supporting straps or devices.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Shall mean and include any of the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic
region; buttocks; and female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola;
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered;
      (3)   Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of the body
parts included in (1) or (2) above.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Shall mean and include any of the following,
whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;
      (2)   Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
other activities described in (1) through (3) above.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00)
§ 154.03 MINIMUM PROXIMITY REQUIREMENTS.
   No adult entertainment business shall be established or located in any zone
in the city other than Light Industrial (M-1) Zone or Heavy Industrial (M 2)
Zone without compliance with Title 11, Business Regulations, Chapter
118, Adult Entertainment Business Regulations, or within certain distances of
certain specified land uses or zones as set forth below.
   (A)   No such business shall be established or located in any zone in the
city other than Light Industrial (M-1) Zone or Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone, or
within 500 feet of any other adult entertainment business.
   (B)   No such business shall be established or located in any zone in the
city other than Light Industrial (M-1) Zone or Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone, or
within 300 feet from any existing residential zone, park, church, and school.
   (C)   The distances set forth above shall be measured as a radius from the
primary entrance of the adult business to the property lines of the property so
zoned or used without regard to intervening structures.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-26-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 155: GRADING
Section
   
155.01   Purpose
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   Applicability and exemptions
   
155.04   General grading/clearing performance standards
   
155.05   Minor grading/clearing permit submittals and procedures (grading
sketch)
   
155.06   Major grading/clearing permit submittals and procedures (grading/
clearing plan)
   
155.07   Blasting
   
155.08   Temporary rock crushing
   
155.09   Inspections and performance defaults
   
155.10   Variances
   
155.11   Enforcement and penalties
§ 155.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
property, general welfare, and aesthetics by regulating and establishing
performance standards for all grading/clearing (including initial clearing,
brushing or grubbing, and subsequent excavating or filling) on private and
public lands.
   (B)   This chapter establishes grading/clearing performance standards and
permit thresholds for all grading/clearing activities designed to:
      (1)   Regulate the development of potentially hazardous terrain;
      (2)   Conserve the general visual character of grading/clearing sites and
settings;
      (3)   Enhance the aesthetic value of new development;
      (4)   Conserve the aesthetic value of surrounding properties;
      (5)   Protect water quality;
      (6)   Minimize adverse impacts on air quality;
      (7)   Reduce propagation of noxious weeds; and
      (8)   Minimize adverse storm water impacts.
(Ord. 2004-006, passed 8-23-04)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter only, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS ROAD. A road within one mile of the grading/clearing site, designated
on the approved grading/clearing plan, and used, during grading/clearing, for
the transport of grading equipment, hauling of fill and other equivalent
vehicular traffic to and from the grading/clearing site.
   AFFECTED AREA. Area to be disturbed by grading/clearing activities.
   APPLICANT. The person, company, or corporation responsible for the managing
and conducting of grading/clearing operations.
   APPROVAL. Written notice by the City Engineer or Building Official or
designees approving the design, progress, or completion of work.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Building Official for minor grading/clearing permits
and the City Engineer for major grading/clearing permits.
   APPROVED PLAN. The most current grading/clearing sketch or grading/clearing
plan, which bears the authorized signature of approval of the City Engineer or
Building Official.
   BERM. A mound or wall of earth used for landscaping purposes.
   BLASTING. Any activity entailing the use of explosives for the purpose of
producing an explosion to demolish structures or to fragment rock for mining,
quarrying, excavation and construction.
   BLASTING OPERATIONS. Blasting operations are herein defined to mean drilling
and site preparation for blasting and detonation itself.
   BORROW. Earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in
grading/clearing a site.
   BRUSHING. The selective removal of vegetation.
   CITY. City of Riverbank, including its duly authorized representatives.
   CLEARING. The substantial removal of vegetation.
   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
   DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (dbh). A measurement of tree diameter taken
between four and five feet from ground level.
   DRAINAGE CONTROL SYSTEM. A method of containing or channeling storm water.
   EARTH MATERIAL. Any rock, natural soil or fill or any combination thereof.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for
immediate action to preserve life or property.
   ENVELOPE, BUILDING. The building footprint for all structures including all
attached roof structures such as carports, covered patios and ramadas but
excluding typical eave overhangs.
   EROSION. The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement
of wind, water or ice.
   EXCAVATION. The removal of earth material by manual labor, mechanical
equipment, blasting, or other such means.
   EXPLOSIVES. Any substance, chemical compound, or mechanical mixture that is
commonly used for the purpose of producing an explosion to fragment rock for
mining, quarrying, excavation, and construction. Initiating devices
(detonators, detonating cords, etc.) are also included under this definition.
   FILL. The addition of earth material by manual labor, mechanical equipment,
blasting, or other such means.
   FINAL INSPECTION. Field inspection conducted by the city prior to project
acceptance or release of assurances if required.
   GRADE. The vertical location of the ground surface.
   GRADE, EXISTING. The actual current ground surface as naturally occurring
formations or as altered prior to the date of adoption of this chapter.
   GRADE, FINISHED. The final ground elevation, after all grading/clearing has
been completed conforming to the approved grading/clearing sketch or plan.
   GRADE, ROUGH. The stage at which grading substantially conforms to the
approved grading sketch or plan in an unfinished state.
   GRADING. The excavating or filling of a site.
   GRADING/CLEARING PERMIT. An official document issued by the city authorizing
the grading/clearing activity specified by the grading/clearing permit
conditions.
   GRADING/CLEARING PERMIT CONDITIONS. The specifications and requirements of
the approved grading/clearing sketch or grading/clearing plan, grading/clearing
statement, soils report or other documents necessary for grading/clearing
permit approval.
   GRUBBING. The removal of trees and other large plants by their roots.
   INSPECTOR. A person authorized by the City Engineer or Building Official to
perform inspection on grading/clearing work.
   LAND USE ACTION. Includes any consideration for approval of a quasi-judicial
plan amendment or zone change, any consideration for approval of a land use
permit and any consideration of a request for a declaratory ruling (including
resolution of any procedural questions raised in any of these actions).
   MITIGATION. The general conditions of approval on an approved grading/
clearing permit that rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or
restoring the affected environment.
   NOXIOUS WEEDS. Those species of plants that are considered harmful as listed
by the Oregon Department of Agriculture.
   PAVEMENT. Any impermeable surface.
   RETAINING WALL. A wall designed to resist the lateral displacement of soil
or other material, as defined in the current Uniform Building Code (UBC) code.
   RE-VEGETATION. Placement of living plant material on sites or excavation and
fill slopes where the natural vegetation has been removed.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. That portion of land acquired for construction of a roadway
and supporting utilities falling under the jurisdiction of public entities.
   SETBACKS. The minimum required horizontal distance from a given point or
line of reference.
   SITE. Any lot or parcel of land, or contiguous combination of lots, parcels,
and or easements under the same ownership or unified control.
   SLOPE. An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as
a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance or expressed as a percent
of the change in elevation over a given distance.
   SLOPE, EXPOSED. Any graded slope that is 3:1 or steeper.
   SOIL. Unconsolidated sediments and deposits of solid mineral particles that
have resulted from the disintegration of rock and can be excavated manually.
   STABILIZATION. Treatment that reduces the potential for erosion or increases
the structural strength of a graded area.
   STOCKPILING. Temporary storage of earth materials.
   STREAM. A year round flowing watercourse.
   TERRACE. A relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope
surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.
   VEGETATION. Any plant material including trees, brush, shrubs, grasses, etc.
(Ord. 2004-006, passed 8-23-04)
§ 155.03 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Scope. All grading/clearing activities shall be done in accordance
with the provision of this chapter.
      (1)   All grading/clearing activities in the city shall conform to the
performance standards as stated in
§ 155.04, unless exempted or a variance is obtained through the provisions of
§ 155.10.
      (2)   All grading/clearing as defined by the thresholds of divisions (B)
and (C) of this section shall require a grading/clearing permit, except as
exempted in division (D) of this section.
   (B)   Permit applicability.
      (1)   Either a minor or major grading/clearing permit shall be required
for the following actions:
         (a)   Excavation or fill slopes exceeding two feet;
         (b)   Alteration to or creation of slopes exceeding 10%;
         (c)   An excavation or fill slope within two feet of the property
boundary; and
         (d)   Any excavation, fill slope or vegetation removal within riparian
corridors is subject to regulations in the Floodplain Overlay Zone.
      (2)   A grading/clearing permit will not be required for grading/clearing
activities approved in conjunction with the building and/or land use permitting
processes, as those activities will be reviewed in conjunction with those
permits. When grading/clearing activities are associated with a land use action
or a building permit, information showing compliance with this chapter shall be
submitted with those applications.
   (C)   Permit types: minor and major grading/clearing permits.
      (1)   Minor grading/clearing permit. Minor grading/clearing permits shall
be obtained when activities are proposed to affect an area one acre or less
pursuant to thresholds in division (B) above.
      (2)   Major grading/clearing permit. Major grading/clearing permits shall
be obtained when activities are proposed to affect an area greater than one
acre pursuant to thresholds in division (B) above.
   (D)   Exemptions.  
      (1)   The following activities, while subject to all other applicable
city ordinances and the performance standards listed in
§ 155.04 do not require a grading/clearing permit:
         (a)   Excavation or fill not exceeding two feet or a finished graded
slope less than 10%.
         (b)    Normal and customary trenching/excavation for public and
private utilities and public and private irrigation lines when the affected
area is returned to the original grade.
         (c)   Raised beds and landscaped berms that do not exceed four feet in
height and are setback two or more feet from the property boundary.
         (d)   Normal and customary excavation and fill associated with the
ongoing maintenance activities on golf courses such as reconstruction of tee
boxes, re-sculpturing of fairway bunkers and greens, etc.
         (e)   Stockpiling of earth materials.
         (f)   The addition of six inches or less of soil for normal customary
landscaping.
         (g)   Resurfacing or maintenance of an existing paved surface.
         (h)   Excavation below finished grade for a foundation proposed in
conjunction with a building permit or land use permit application.
         (i)   Exploratory excavation under the direction of a soil engineer or
engineering geologist provided all excavation is properly backfilled.
         (j)   Underground utility installations and maintenance under a paved
roadway surface or a continuously maintained unpaved roadway surface.
         (k)   Grading/clearing for the maintenance of an existing private
access road or driveway, provided either existed prior to adoption of, or was
established in conformance with, this chapter.
         (l)   Grading for an appurtenant access, public infrastructure
maintenance, or utility easement.
      (2)   The following activities while subject to all other applicable city
ordinances do not require a grading/clearing permit and are exempted from this
chapter:
         (a)   Archaeological exploration conducted under state permit;
         (b)   Removal of selected individual plants;
         (c)   All other land uses exempt from local regulations under state
and federal statutes;
         (d)   Removal of trees on single family residential lots one acre or
less;
         (e)   Removal of flammable vegetation and combustible growth within 30
feet of a structure for fire safety;
         (f)   Normal maintenance, pruning or limbing of trees;
         (g)   Removal of noxious weeds;
         (h)   Normal pruning, limbing and removal of trees and vegetation in
the routine maintenance of public school grounds, parks and trails that is not
associated with preliminary grading or clearing for a development project;
         (i)   Normal pruning, limbing and removal of trees and vegetation in
the routine maintenance of golf courses and cemeteries that is not associated
with preliminary grading or clearing for a development project; and
         (j)   An emergency that immediately affects life or property.
(Ord. 2004-006, passed 8-23-04)
§ 155.04 GENERAL GRADING/CLEARING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Scope. All grading/clearing activities shall be done in accordance
with this section.
   (B)   Re-vegetation and stabilization of the affected area.  All graded and
or cleared areas including excavation and fill slopes shall be re-vegetated or
stabilized in order to reduce erosion, dust and noxious weeds. When a permit is
issued, the re-vegetation or stabilization shall occur within the timeline
established on the approved grading plan.
   (C)   Fill.  Fill greater than two feet for non-structural areas shall be
compacted to a minimum of 90% of maximum dry density, as determined by the
"Standard Proctor" method (American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) or
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO)),
or equivalent method approved by the City Engineer or Building Official.
   (D)   Erosion and drainage control systems.
      (1)   Permanent systems.
         (a)   Erosion control. Erosion control shall be designed, constructed,
and maintained to prevent erosion of graded or disturbed areas that may result
in off site sediment deposition.
         (b)   Shoulders. The shoulders of a paved public or private roadway,
pathways, trails and sidewalks shall be protected against erosion wherever
curbing or constructed spillways are not provided.
         (c)   Surface drainage. All surface drainage created by proposed
development or grading activities shall be contained on-site unless routed to
an approved drainage facility. Excavation and fill slopes shall be provided
with engineered surface drainage designed for stability and erosion protection
of affected properties.
         (d)   Natural and existing drainage routes. Natural and existing
drainage routes shall be shown on and planned for as part of the grading/
clearing plan. The plan shall demonstrate that grading/clearing activities will
have minimal impact on the existing water flow through the natural and existing
drainage routes, except in instances where an approved surface water collection
and disposal facility is incorporated into the grading/clearing plan.
         (e)   Subsurface drainage. Subsurface drainage measures for stability
and protection of affected properties from water seepage may be required.
      (2)   Temporary systems. Approved temporary drainage control systems
shall be provided in phased developments, during construction or when
conditions warrant.
   (E)   Import and export of earth material.
      (1)   All other required permits shall be obtained prior to importing or
exporting of any earth material on any project requiring a grading/clearing
permit.
      (2)   During all required inspections, approved plans and permits must be
available onsite.
      (3)   The transportation of earth material on public rights-of-way shall
be in a manner that does not allow blowing soil and other hazards, in
accordance with other state and local regulations.
   (F)   Hours of operation.
      (1)   Grading equipment operation and maintenance shall be conducted in
accordance with the requirements of the Riverbank Code
Chapter 93, Noise.
      (2)   The City Manager may allow grading equipment operation or
maintenance during other hours if such operations are not detrimental to public
health, safety, or welfare.
      (3)   Permitted hours of operation or maintenance may be shortened by
written notice, if the City Engineer finds a substantial adverse effect on the
public health, safety, or welfare.
   (G)   Restriction of vehicles.
      (1)   No vehicles shall be driven over natural open space areas that have
been designated on the applicant's approved grading/clearing sketch or grading/
clearing plan except as vehicle use is included in the plan.
      (2)   Points-of-entry to the site during grading/clearing shall be only
as designated on the approved grading/clearing sketch or grading/clearing plan.
      (3)   For major grading/clearing permits, access roads to the site during
grading/clearing shall be only as designated on the approved grading/clearing
plan.
   (H)   Dust control. 
      (1)   During grading/clearing, and until re-vegetation or stabilization
has taken place; dust shall be minimized through application of approved dust
control measures.
      (2)   All grading/clearing activities must comply with all San Joaquin
Valley Air Pollution Control District regulations for air quality, fugitive and
visual emissions.
   (I)   Additional requirements.
      (1)   Public rights-of-way, sidewalks and other improvements shall be
maintained by the permit holder during grading/clearing in a neat and clean
condition, free of loose soil, construction debris, and trash.
      (2)   Debris, fill or equipment shall not be stored within a public
right-of-way or emergency access routes.
(Ord. 2004-006, passed 8-23-04)
§ 155.05 MINOR GRADING/CLEARING PERMIT SUBMITTALS AND PROCEDURES (GRADING
SKETCH).
   (A)   Minor grading permit applicant requirements. A person seeking a minor
grading permit must:
      (1)   Either be an owner of the real property to be graded or have a
current, valid State of California Contractor License; and
      (2)   Make and execute to the city a surety bond in the sum of $10,000
conditioned on the faithful performance of all ordinances of the city relating
to grading; on the prompt payment to the city of all fees for permits and
licenses that may become due and owing to the city; the payment of all fines
imposed for violation of this chapter during the life of the bond; and on
indemnifying the city, its officers, agents and employees from any liability
for damages arising from his/her negligence or un-skillfulness in doing,
protecting and completing his/her work. The bond shall be in full force and
effect for a period of one year after cancellation or completion of
construction. This section shall not require a bond in addition to any bond
already furnished to the city pursuant to
Chapters 152 or
153.
   (B)   Scope. An application for a minor grading/clearing permit requires a
completed grading/clearing permit application, grading/clearing sketch and
grading/clearing statement. A survey stamped by a registered land surveyor is
not required.
   (C)   Grading/clearing sketch requirements:
      (1)   The existing and proposed finished grade of the area to be graded
based on spot elevations and two foot contour interval maps as applicable;
      (2)   The extent of graded areas, delineated and labeled excavation or
fill and, where structures are to be constructed:
         (a)   The existing grade at the primary building corners and proposed
finished floor elevations; and
         (b)   The proposed building heights, shown to conform to the building
height requirements.
      (3)   The location of proposed mitigation measures, such as re-vegetation
or retaining walls;
      (4)   The exterior boundaries of the site;
      (5)   Access roads and points-of-entry to the grading/clearing site,
including gravel construction entrances;
      (6)   The approximate location of all trees eight inches dbh and larger;
and
      (7)   Delineation of any areas to be preserved.
   (D)   Grading/clearing statement. A written grading/clearing statement shall
be submitted with an application for a grading/clearing permit. The statement
shall include, where applicable:
      (1)   A description of both temporary and permanent stabilization,
erosion and drainage control measures;
      (2)   Estimated start and completion dates;
      (3)   A description of the dust control method to be used during grading/
clearing and until re-vegetation or stabilization has been completed; and
      (4)   A description of the tree protection standards to be implemented
during construction.
   (E)   Documents preparation. Documents shall be prepared in accordance with
city requirements.
   (F)   Application.
      (1)   The grading/clearing permit application, grading/clearing sketch
and grading/clearing statement shall be submitted for review to the Building
Division of the City Community Development Department.
      (2)   The grading/clearing permit application shall be completed and is
required to be signed by the property owner.
      (3)   Fees are payable to the city in accordance with the fees resolution
adopted by city.
   (G)   Application review.
      (1)   The grading/clearing sketch and statement shall be reviewed for
consistency with applicable regulations and standards (refer to
§ 155.04), and grading/clearing permit application status shall be determined
within ten working days of application.
      (2)   If determined inadequate, the application shall be returned and the
applicant may resubmit an amended grading/clearing sketch or statement.
      (3)   The City Building Official shall require that plans and
specifications be modified to make them consistent with this chapter and any
other applicable regulations.
   (H)   Grading/clearing permit issuance and expiration.
      (1)   Issuance. Grading/clearing permits are issued by the City Community
Development Department. A copy of the grading/clearing permit and approved
grading/clearing sketch shall be kept in an easily accessible location on the
site; and
      (2)   Expiration. A grading/clearing permit shall be null and void if the
authorized work has not been completed within 180 days of permit issuance.
   (I)   Grading/clearing permit extension and reapplication.
      (1)   Extensions. Upon written request by the permit holder, the City
Engineer or Building Official may approve a single 185 day extension of a
grading/clearing permit.
      (2)   Non-Conformance Reapplication. Non-compliance with the approved
grading/clearing sketch will require reapplication for a grading/clearing
permit in conformance with this chapter. Applicable penalties and additional
conditions may be imposed on the permit.
      (3)   Expiration Reapplication. Reapplication for a Grading/Clearing
Permit may be made in accordance with this chapter. Additional conditions may
be imposed on a permit, as a consequence of reapplication.
   (J)   Changes to Grading/Clearing Permit.
      (1)    Emergency conditions. If drainage problems, flood hazards or other
hazards occur that were not anticipated at the time the permit was issued, the
permit holder may submit the necessary engineering modifications in a report to
be reviewed and approved by the City Building Official.
      (2)   Non-emergency conditions. If unanticipated non-emergency conditions
are encountered during grading/clearing and are beyond the scope of the
grading/clearing permit, a non-conformance reapplication shall be required by
the City Building Official.
(Ord. 2004-006, passed 8-23-04)
§ 155.06 MAJOR GRADING/CLEARING PERMIT SUBMITTALS AND PROCEDURES (GRADING/
CLEARING PLAN).
   (A)   Permit applicant requirements. A person seeking a major grading permit
must:
      (1)   Either be an owner of the real property to be graded or be an agent
of the owner that is a current, valid Registered Civil Engineer or a Licensed
Landscape Architect with the State of California; and
      (2)   Provide to the city a surety bond in the sum equaling 120% of the
estimate of a Registered Civil Engineer to complete the grading that is
conditioned on the faithful performance of all ordinances of the city relating
to grading; on the prompt payment to the city of all fees for permits and
licenses that may become due and owing to the city; the payment of all fines
imposed for violation of this chapter during the life of the bond; and on
indemnifying the city, its officers, agents and employees from any liability
for damages arising from his/her negligence or unskillfulness in doing,
protecting and completing his/her work. The bond shall be in full force and
effect for a period of one year after cancellation or completion of
construction. This section shall not require a bond in addition to any bond
already furnished to the city pursuant to Chapters
152 or
153.
   (B)   Scope. An application for a major grading/clearing permit requires a
completed grading/clearing permit application, grading/clearing plan, grading/
clearing statement, soils report (as required) and drainage improvement plan
prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed landscape architect.
   (C)   Grading/clearing plans requirements.
      (1)   The existing grade contours, proposed finished grade contours
(minimum of one foot, maximum of ten feet) and sufficient spot elevations of
the area to be graded including the general topography (such as city aerial
maps or visual site inspection) for a minimum of 100 feet beyond the affected
area or as determined by the City Engineer. This information shall be prepared
by a registered civil engineer or licensed landscape architect.
      (2)   If known, the extent of building envelopes and where structures are
to be constructed:
         (a)   Spot elevations shall be shown for the finished grade within the
building envelope;
         (b)   All building pads showing the existing grade at the primary
building corners and proposed finished floor elevations; and
         (c)   The proposed building heights shown to conform to the building
height requirements.
      (3)   A description of the preservation and mitigation methods,
specifying elevations, dimensions, quantities, and locations, to be used during
grading/clearing and until re-vegetation or stabilization has been completed.
         (a)   The extent and manner of preserving, relocating, clearing and
disposing of existing vegetation;
         (b)   The final ground cover, re-vegetation (if any), erosion control
and proposed methods for excavation or fill stabilization, based upon the soils
report (refer to division (D) of this section); and
         (c)   Both temporary and permanent drainage improvement plans shall
contain:
            1.   Drainage or other protective devices to be constructed as part
of the grading;
            2.   The drainage area and estimated runoff of the area served by
drains;
            3.   Depiction of the site boundaries (by bearing and distance),
existing survey monuments, and a local and/or temporary benchmark with the
elevation and co-ordinates;
            4.   The location of all trees eight inches dbh and larger within
the affected area and the location of any regulated areas or areas to be
preserved (i.e. Areas of Special Interest, wetlands, open spaces, etc.); and
            5.   Access roads, haul routes and all points-of-entry including
but not limited to all gravel construction entrances, to the grading/clearing
site.
   (D)   Grading/clearing statement. A written grading/clearing statement shall
be submitted with an application for a grading/clearing permit. The statement
shall include, where applicable:
      (1)   A description of both temporary and permanent stabilization,
erosion and drainage control measures;
      (2)   The off-site disposal location and estimated quantity of earth
material and vegetation to be removed from the site during grading/clearing;
      (3)   The off-site source location and estimated quantity of materials to
be delivered to the site during grading/clearing;
      (4)   Estimated starting and completion dates;
      (5)   A description of the dust control method to be used during grading/
clearing and until re-vegetation or stabilization has been completed; and
      (6)   A description of the tree protection standards to be implemented
during construction.
   (E)   Soils report. A geotechnical report may be required when slopes
greater than 2:1, retaining walls or extensive areas of fill are proposed,
unusual soil conditions are encountered or upon the request of the City
Engineer.
      (1)   The report shall contain all geotechnical engineering information
and recommendations applicable to the project and shall be stamped by a
registered professional engineer;
      (2)   The report shall be incorporated into the grading clearing plan and
statement; and
      (3)   The applicant shall be required to provide written certification to
the City Engineer that embankment/fill within proposed public rights of way
complies with the city standards and specifications or to the Building Official
that filled areas under proposed buildings have met the foundation
requirements.
   (F)   Documents preparation.
      (1)   Documents shall be prepared in accordance with city requirements;
      (2)   Information shall conform to land use conditions (when applicable)
and shall be consistent with the land use site analysis and other applicable
regulations; and
      (3)   Grading/clearing plan preparation. The plan shall be prepared by a
registered civil engineer.
   (G)   Application.
      (1)   The grading/clearing permit application, grading/clearing plan and
other required materials shall be submitted to the Engineering Division of the
City Public Works Department for distribution to the applicable city review
agencies;
      (2)   The grading/clearing permit application shall be completed and is
required to be signed by the property owner; and
      (3)   Fees are payable to the city in accordance with the fees schedule
adopted by city ordinance.
   (H)   Grading/clearing assurances in the absence of land use approval.
      (1)   (a)   When approval has been granted for grading/clearing,
assurances shall be required in the absence of land use approval in an amount
not to exceed 120% of the cost estimate made by a registered professional
engineer or registered landscape architect for restoration of the site to
original conditions or for compliance with grading/clearing permit.
         (b)   Assurances shall consist of one of the following:
            1.   A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to
transact business in the State of California in a form approved by the City
Attorney;
            2.   A cash deposit in a city account at an approved lending
institution;
            3.   An irrevocable standby letter of credit from a federally
insured banking institution or savings and loan operating in California that
unconditionally promises to pay the funds pledged upon demand by the city. Such
obligation must be unaffected by the financial status of the person who has
obtained the letter of credit;
            4.   An "Assurance Provider" arrangement between the owner, the
city and a federally insured financial institution which assures the city that
the funds to complete the performance of the owner's grading/clearing permit
will be provided by the federally insured financial institution to the city in
the event the owner does not complete performance of the grading/clearing
permit. The form of the Assurance Provider arrangement and the federally
insured financial institution must be satisfactory to the city.
      (2)   The assurances shall be released by the city when the grading/
clearing has been inspected and received the written approval of the City
Engineer or Building Official. Final approval of a grading/clearing permit
shall not require the release of the assurances in the event of grading/
clearing noncompliance.
   (I)   Application review consistent with approved engineered plans.
      (1)   Grading/clearing plans and related submittals shall be reviewed
concurrent with land use action, the construction plans, or building permit
review process for the project; and
      (2)   Prior to approval of the grading/clearing plan, the City Engineer
shall inspect the site to determine that the submittals are current and reflect
existing conditions;
   (J)   Grading/clearing permit extension and reapplication.
      (1)   A grading/clearing permit shall be null and void if the authorized
work has not been completed within 180 days of permit issuance or a longer
timeline is authorized by the City Engineer at the time of grading/clearing
permit issuance.
      (2)   Extensions. Upon written request by the permit holder, the City
Engineer may approve 185 day time extensions of a grading/clearing permit.
      (3)   Non-Conformance Reapplication. Non-compliance with the approved
grading/clearing sketch will require reapplication for a grading/clearing
permit in conformance with this chapter. Applicable penalties and additional
conditions may be imposed on the permit.
      (4)   Expiration Reapplication. Reapplication for a grading/clearing
permit may be made in accordance with this chapter. Assurances of additional
conditions may be imposed on a permit, as a consequence of reapplication.
   (K)   Changes to grading/clearing permit.
      (1)   Emergency conditions. If drainage problems, flood hazards or other
hazards occur that were not anticipated at the time the permit was issued, the
City Engineer shall require that any substantial engineering modifications be
submitted in a report and that the grading/clearing design be modified.
      (2)   Non-emergency conditions. If unanticipated non-hazardous conditions
are encountered during grading/clearing and are beyond the scope of the
grading/clearing permit, the permit holder may submit the necessary engineering
modifications in a report to be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2004-006, passed 8-23-04)
§ 155.07 BLASTING.
   (A)   This section in no way replaces or negates the requirements pertaining
to explosives as adopted by the State of California or any other statute in
effect within Stanislaus County.
   (B)   All persons conducting blasting activities shall comply with all
federal, state and local regulations applicable to blasting activities. Such
person shall have and provide upon request, evidence of all necessary federal,
state and local licensing required to conduct blasting activities.
   (C)   Notification. Notice of all blasting shall be provided to the City
Engineer. Prior to blasting, the person responsible for the blast shall inform
all building occupants within 100 feet of the blast site.
      (1)   The City Engineer may require additional notification for sensitive
areas such as medical districts, hospitals, schools, etc.; and
      (2)   Signs shall be placed at street intersections adjacent to the
blasting site on the day of the blasting or earlier if feasible. Signs shall
state approximate blasting times and whom to contact.
(Ord. 2004-006, passed 8-23-04)
§ 155.08 TEMPORARY ROCK CRUSHING.
   (A)   Temporary permitted rock crushing. Temporary on-site rock crushing for
on-site construction and maintenance is permitted outright in any zone if the
following standards are met:
      (1)   The subject property has received site plan, tentative plat or
final plat approval for the construction or maintenance activity or is an
approved public facility project;
      (2)   Rock crushing equipment has a San Joaquin Unified Air Pollution
Control District air contaminant discharge permit;
      (3)   The crushing equipment is capable of providing material meeting
"three quarter (3/4) inch minus" specifications;
      (4)   No off site materials are brought on site for crushing;
      (5)   Rock crushing equipment is removed from the site within 15 days of
completing the crushing activity;
      (6)   Excavated crushed material not used for on-site construction or
landscaping is removed to a city approved location within 15 days of completing
the crushing activity;
      (7)   The rock crushing equipment is set up as far away as practicable
from any property line or existing residence but in no case shall the setback
be less than 150 feet;
      (8)   The duration of the temporary rock crushing activity is for no more
than 60 consecutive days from the issuance of the permit, unless the applicant
obtains an extension of time pursuant to the City of Riverbank Land Use Permit
and Procedures Ordinance;
      (9)   Rock crushing occurs Monday through Friday, between 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m., and not on legal holidays; and
      (10)   Water is available to provide dust control.
   (B)   Application requirements.  An application for a temporary permit for
on-site rock crushing shall contain the following.
      (1)   A detailed explanation of the proposed construction and rock
crushing activities, including:
         (a)   An approved grading/clearing plan;
         (b)   An estimate of the amount material to be processed;
         (c)   The amount of material to be used on site and the amount to be
removed if any; and
         (d)   The duration and operating characteristics of the rock crushing
activity.
      (2)   An explanation of how the proposal will reduce truck trips or
otherwise benefit the community.
      (3)   A map drawn to scale showing:
         (a)   The location of property boundaries;
         (b)   The truck travel route for vehicles accessing the site and rock
material being removed from site;
         (c)   The location site for material being removed;
         (d)   Setbacks to the rock crushing activity; and
         (e)   Any topographic features in the immediate vicinity of the
proposed rock crusher.
      (4)   Any additional information, which will assist in the evaluation of
the proposed rock crushing.
      (5)   The application shall be processed pursuant to the City of
Riverbank Land Use Permit and Procedures Ordinance.
   (C)   Revocation of a Temporary Permit for Noncompliance. Any permit for
temporary permit for rock crushing granted in accordance with the terms of this
chapter may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms of such permit are
violated.
(Ord. 2004-006, passed 8-23-04)
§ 155.09 INSPECTIONS AND PERFORMANCE DEFAULTS.
   (A)   All construction subject to these regulations shall be subject to
inspection by the City Engineer and the City Public Works Department in
addition to inspections by the project engineer and consultants. When required
by the City Engineer, additional inspections and additional testing shall be
performed to verify conformance with these regulations. The cost of additional
inspections and additional testing shall be borne by the property owner.
   (B)   If the City Engineer determines that any portion of the project is not
in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and no waiver of such
requirements has been granted, the City Engineer shall notify, in writing, the
project engineer and or property owner. The project engineer and or property
owner shall take immediate action to resolve the problems(s) enumerated. If
corrective action is not taken to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, then
the City Engineer shall impose one or more of the following:
      (1)   Issue a stop work order;
      (2)   Notify the agency issuing the bond, irrevocable letter of credit,
certificate of deposit or cash deposit used as assurance;
      (3)   Do the necessary work at the property owner's expense;
      (4)   Not sign the final plat;
      (5)   Request the Community Development Department to not issue any
additional building permits for this development; and/or
      (6)   Collect on the bond or irrevocable letter of credit, certificate of
deposit or cash deposit.
   (C)   General inspections.
      (1)   All grading/clearing which requires a permit shall be inspected by
the Building Official, City Engineer or representative in accordance with the
grading/clearing permit:
         (a)   The permit holder shall provide notification 48 hours prior to
an inspection request, or as specified on the grading/clearing permit; and
         (b)   The city shall provide an inspection within two working days of
the request time.
      (2)   If the Building Official, City Engineer or representative finds
site conditions are not as stated in the approved grading/clearing permit
conditions, the City Engineer or Building Official may issue a stop work order
until a revised grading/clearing sketch or plan has been approved.
      (3)   Whenever grading/clearing work requiring city inspection is
concealed by additional work without first having been inspected, the City
Engineer or Building Official may require, by written notice or other means,
that such work be exposed, for inspection by the city.
   (D)   Final inspection of rough grade.
      (1)   All rough grading/clearing shall be completed in accordance with
the grading/clearing permit prior to final rough grade inspection by the city.
      (2)   The final inspection shall be conducted by the city prior to
issuance of a certificate of substantial grading/clearing conformance or
release of grading/clearing assurances (if required). The permit holder shall
provide a minimum of 48 hours notice to the city when any phase of rough
grading/clearing is ready for final inspection.
      (3)   The City Engineer or Building Official may approve completed rough
grading/clearing prior to completion of related work in cases of extreme
hardship or where grading/clearing has been designed to be completed in phases,
provided that no hazards exist and a performance bond has been posted to ensure
completion of remaining grading/clearing work of that phase.
      (4)   The soil report and certification of sub-base requirements shall be
submitted to the Building Official prior to any foundation inspections or to
the City Engineer prior to issuance of certificate of final grading/clearing
approval.
   (E)   Final grading/clearing inspection.
      (1)   All required grading/clearing work shall be completed in accordance
with the grading/clearing permit prior to final grading/clearing inspection by
the City Engineer or Building Official and issuance of a certificate of final
grading/clearing approval.
      (2)   Where the conditions of a grading/clearing permit include the
establishment of vegetation or other final site grading/clearing work that
extends beyond the expiration of the grading/clearing permit, the city shall
make a post-grading/clearing inspection within six months of permit expiration
or as required by the grading/clearing permit before final approval.
   (F)   Maintenance. The owner of any private property on which grading/
clearing or other work has been performed pursuant to an approved grading/
clearing plan, approved land use application or approved building permit
granted by the Community Development Department, shall maintain and repair in
perpetuity all graded surfaces and erosion prevention devices, retaining walls,
drainage structures, plantings and ground cover, or other means or devices
deemed not to be the responsibility of the city or other public agency.
(Ord. 2004-006, passed 8-23-04)
§ 155.10 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Approval Authority may authorize variances from the standards of
this chapter where it can be shown that owing to special and unusual
circumstances related to a specific property, the literal interpretation of
this chapter would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship. In granting a
variance, the Approval Authority may attach conditions found necessary to
protect the best interest of the surrounding property or neighborhood, and to
otherwise achieve the purpose of this chapter.
   (B)   Criteria. No variance shall be granted pursuant to the provisions of
division (A) unless the applicant can establish that:
      (1)   That special conditions exist which are peculiar to the land
involved and which are not applicable to other lands in the general vicinity of
the subject property;
      (2)   That strict interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
general vicinity of the subject property under the terms of this chapter;
      (3)   That the special conditions or circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant and such conditions do not merely constitute pecuniary
hardship or inconvenience; and
      (4)   That granting the variance will be in harmony with the objectives
of this chapter, and not injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental
to the public welfare.
(Ord. 2004-006, passed 8-23-04)
§ 155.11 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Performance standards and grading/clearing permit enforcement:
      (1)   The enforcement of this chapter and conditions of the grading/
clearing permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be regulated by this
section.
      (2)   If the performance standards contained in this chapter are
violated, penalties under division (B) below shall apply.
      (3)   When the City Engineer or Building Official determines that a
substantial noncompliance exists with the conditions of the grading/clearing
permit, the City Engineer or Building Official may issue a stop-work order by
written notice, in addition to the penalties contained in division (B).
      (4)   In addition to the penalties contained in division (B), the City
Engineer or Building Official may issue a stop work order when any work for
which a permit is required by this chapter has been commenced without first
obtaining the permit. The city shall perform an investigation of the site to
determine the appropriate mitigation and or penalties before a permit may be
issued for such work.
      (5)   If the city determines that grading/clearing does not comply with
this chapter or the grading/clearing permit conditions, or that the soil or
site conditions are not as stated on the permit, the City Engineer or Building
Official may order the work stopped by written notice served on any person
engaged in doing or causing such work to be done.
      (6)   When a stop work order is issued pursuant to this chapter, the
applicable person shall immediately stop all building and construction work
until authorized to continue by the City Official who issued the order. The
failure to stop work after being notified of the stop work order shall be a
violation of this chapter and subject to the enforcement remedies contained in
division (B) below.
      (7)   Failure to obtain a grading/clearing permit prior to commencement
of grading/clearing, unless not required or exempted by this chapter, shall be
a violation of this chapter.
      (8)   The City Engineer or Building Official may authorize the refunding
of any fee paid hereunder in accordance with applicable law and the city's
refund policy.
      (9)   If all provisions of this chapter and the terms of a valid grading/
clearing permit have been fulfilled, the city shall not prosecute the permitee
under this chapter for any unforeseen circumstances resulting from the actions
of the permitee.
   (B)   Compliance and penalties. The following enforcement remedies and
penalties can be applied individually or cumulatively upon violation of this
chapter:
      (1)   A violation of the provisions of this chapter is punishable upon
conviction by:
         (a)   For a minor grading/clearing permit, an initial fine of $300
depending upon the severity of the violation and a fine of not more than $100
for each day of violation, where the offense is a continuing offense, but such
fine may not exceed $5,000.
         (b)   For a major grading/clearing permit and other violations of this
chapter including but not limited to the performance standards, an initial fine
of $600 depending upon the severity of the violation and a fine of not more
than $600 for each day of violation where the offense is a continuing offense,
but such fine may not exceed $25,000.
      (2)   If a person or corporation has gained money or an increase in
property value through the violation of this chapter, the court may sentence
the defendant to pay an amount fixed by the court not exceeding double the
amount of the defendants gain from the commission of the violation.
      (3)   In addition to the enforcement and penalty provisions, the Court
may require the replacement of vegetation removed in violation of this chapter.
The amount of replacement trees, shrubs, and ground cover shall be determined
by the area of removed vegetation. The property owner shall enter into a
mitigation agreement plan approved by the city. The mitigation plan shall
include a plan providing for the planting and maintenance of the replacement
vegetation. The plan shall make provisions for the replacement of plants that
die within three years of planting. Failure to enter into a mitigation
agreement plan as required by this section or failure to comply with any
condition of that plan shall be a violation of this chapter and be a separate
violation each day the failure to comply continues.
      (4)   In addition to the enforcement and penalty provisions, the Court
may order the defendant to mitigate the harm caused by the violation of the
chapter. This plan may include but is not limited to the replacement of trees
and vegetation removed by the defendant in violation of this chapter. The
amount of replacement trees, shrubs and ground cover shall be determined by the
area of removed vegetation.
      (5)   The city may refuse to accept any development permit applications
for the property upon which a violation of this chapter has occurred or stop
work on any development approved for the subject property until a permit has
been acquired and an acceptable mitigation plan, if applicable, has been
submitted and performed.
(Ord. 2004-006, passed 8-23-04)
CHAPTER 156: OAK AND LANDMARK TREE PRESERVATION
Section
General Provisions
   
156.01   Purpose
   
156.02   Definitions
Tree Conservation Permits
   
156.10   Willful destruction of landmark/oak trees prohibited
   
156.11   Permit exemptions
   
156.12   Permit applications
   
156.13   Building permit issuance
   
156.14   Protection of trees during construction
   
156.15   Final inspection
   
156.16   Under-story vegetation
   
156.17   Tree conservation permit criteria
   
156.18   Notice of action and appeals
Tree Conservation Standards
   
156.25   Emergencies
   
156.26   I.S.A. Pruning Standards
   
156.27   Enforcement
   
156.28   Public assistance for property owners
   
156.29   Landmark/Oak Tree Maintenance Fund
   
156.30   Tree conservation design guidelines
   
156.31   City projects
Nuisance Abatement
   
156.40   Nuisances
   
156.41   Abatement
   
156.42   Notice of hearing to abate
   
156.43   Form of proper service of notice
   
156.44   Hearing by Planning Commission
   
156.45   Service on owner of resolution to abate
   
156.46   Record of cost for abatement
   
156.47   Hearing and proceedings
   
156.48   Assignment of costs against property; lien
   
156.49   Civil remedies
   
156.50   Authority
   
156.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Trees, see
Ch. 96
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to conserve and protect existing
landmark trees and oak trees.
      (1)   The conservation and protection of these trees within the community
is intended to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of
Riverbank residents by enhancing the air quality, water quality and beauty of
Riverbank.
      (2)   Oak and landmark trees are recognized as an essential part of the
city infrastructure, and as such will receive equal consideration with other
city infrastructure systems.
   (B)   This chapter is intended to complement and strengthen zoning,
subdivision and land use standards and regulations to more accurately reflect
community expectations and goals of the general plan.
      (1)   Specifically, the purpose of the chapter is to implement Goal VII
of the Land Use Element, “To enhance and maintain the quality of life in
Riverbank and to encourage a community identity and a pride in that community.”
      (2)   The preservation of native valley oaks and other landmark trees is
intended to advance this goal by:
         (a)   Enhancing natural scenic beauty by providing habitat and food
source for birds and other wildlife;
         (b)   Naturally reducing air pollution by filtering out harmful gasses
and replenishing the atmosphere with oxygen by assisting in the overall goal of
preservation, maintenance and regeneration of a healthy urban forest and tree
cover;
         (c)   Lowering heating and cooling costs by promoting the conservation
of energy resources and regulation of temperature through the shade,
evaporative cooling and wind break provided by trees;
         (d)   Reducing topsoil erosion by the holding effect of their roots;
         (e)   Promoting conservation of water resources by reducing surface
water runoff resulting from storms;
         (f)   Promoting the well being of the community by absorbing sound and
buffer noise, such as vehicular traffic;
         (g)   Enhancing economic stability by attracting businesses and
visitors by providing recreational settings, wildlife habitat, and ecological
balance;
         (h)   Increasing property values by promoting the city’s unique
identity; and
         (i)   Providing for safety through responsible and safe standards for
the trimming and/or removal of native valley oaks and other landmark trees.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CROWN DRIPLINE. The outer perimeter of an oak/landmark tree's canopy.
   DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director of the city or his or her
designated representative.
   LANDMARK TREE. Trees that are: (1) six inches or greater in diameter at
breast height (DBH); (2) in good health; and (3) of preferred species in order:
(a) oak, (b) deciduous and (c) evergreen; (4) other such trees with significant
impact (including but not limited to: age, size, location, outstanding habitat
value, superior beauty, historical and/or cultural significance) on the
surrounding area. LANDMARK TREE may also mean an “oak tree.” Fruit trees and
other trees used for agricultural purposes and production on existing lots
created prior to June 8, 2006, are specifically excluded as being landmark
trees.
   OAK TREE. A valley oak tree (Quercus lobata) with a trunk diameter of two
inches or greater at a point 4.5 feet above the root crown (also referred to as
“two inches diameter breast height (DBH.)”). OAK TREE may also mean a “landmark
tree.”
   PERSON. An individual, association, corporation, public agency, joint
venture, partnership, independent contractor, or other agent or employee.
   PRUNING STANDARDS. Pruning standards established by the Western Chapter of
the International Society of Arboriculture (I.S.A.) dated 1995, as revised by
the Society from time to time, and as amended by this chapter.
   SIX-INCH GROUPING OF TREES. Any group of two or more trees that have a
combined DBH of six inches or greater. Every six inches of such a group shall
be the equivalent of a six-inch tree. For removal purposes, this grouping
definition shall apply if two or more trees are removed within 12 months of
each other.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
TREE CONSERVATION PERMITS
§ 156.10 WILLFUL DESTRUCTION OF LANDMARK/OAK TREES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully remove, destroy, mutilate, poison
or attempt to kill a landmark/oak tree in the city without a tree conservation
permit.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.11 PERMIT EXEMPTIONS.
   A landmark/oak tree may be removed under the following conditions without a
conservation permit:
   (A)   (1)   When removal is necessary to observe good forestry practice,
such as optimizing the number of healthy trees a given parcel of land will
support, or when such removal is in accordance with a city-approved landscape
management plan.
      (2)   No replacement is required under these circumstances.
   (B)   When the tree, due to natural circumstances, is dead or irreversibly
declining, is in danger of falling, is too close to existing structures so as
to endanger such structures, interferes with utility services, creates unsafe
vision clearance, or constitutes a health hazard.
      (1)   Such trees may be removed only after the Community Development
Director, at his or her sole and absolute discretion, has verified that such a
condition exists.
      (2)   In instances where no additional services or inspections are
required by the Community Development Department, the fee for a tree removal
permit will be waived and no tree survey will be required.
      (3)   No replacement is required under these circumstances.
   (C)   Neither this nor any other regulation of this chapter shall be deemed
to prohibit any owner of improved residential property in the city from
creating a single, regularly shaped rear yard lawn area.
   (D)   When the Community Development Director concludes that benefits
provided by trees will be increased by replacing a tree that is of poor quality
or not suited to its location.
      (1)   Such trees must be replaced on the subject property, on an inch-
per-inch basis.
      (2)   Prior to issuance of the tree removal permit, the property owner
will be required to pay a permit fee and submit the appropriate cash bond to
insure tree replacement.
   (E)   The Community Development Director may require a tree survey prior to
removal for division (A), (C) or (D) above.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.12 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)    Pre-application conference. Prior to submission of an application for
development, the applicant is encouraged to meet with the Community Development
Director to discuss the tree protection ordinance as it relates to the
applicant's property.
      (1)   There are two types of tree conservation permits, minor and major,
with varying requirements for each permit.
      (2)   The purpose of the pre-application conference is to clarify the
provisions and procedures of the tree protection ordinance, and to review
applicable standards and guidelines for the submittal of documents and required
tree protection, replacement and maintenance measures.
   (B)   Requirements must be met.  
      (1)   Regardless of the type of tree conservation permit required, when
any building permit, grading permit, or development permit is applied for
pursuant to the city code, and a proposed structure would require the
destruction, removal or pruning of a landmark/oak tree, such permit shall not
be issued until all requirements of this chapter are met.
      (2)   In no event shall any disturbance of the premises be allowed until
all requirements of this chapter are met and the permit is issued.
   (C)    Minor tree conservation permit. 
      (1)   Any person desiring to destroy or remove an oak tree or landmark
tree on private or public property, in conjunction with a ministerial action,
such as an encroachment or building permit, must first obtain a minor tree
conservation permit by applying in writing to the Community Development
Director.
         (a)   The application shall contain the number, size and location of
the oak/landmark tree(s), and a brief statement of the reason of the requested
action.
         (b)   The Director shall charge a fee for the permit, to be
established by the City Council's annual designation of city fees.
         (c)   The initial removal permit fee shall not exceed $50.
      (2)   Within seven days of receipt of such application, the Director
shall inspect the premises whereon such oak/landmark tree(s) are located, and
shall issue an intended decision in writing as to whether or not the
application will be approved, with or without conditions; provided, however,
that failure to render an intended decision within such period shall not be
deemed approval.
   (D)    Major tree conservation permit.
      (1)   Permit required. 
         (a)   Except as provided elsewhere in this section, a major tree
conservation permit shall be required as part of any application for a site
plan and architectural review, planned development permit, tentative parcel
map, tentative subdivision map or any other discretionary land use entitlement
that will result in a physical change in the environment.
         (b)   A major removal permit may be processed in conjunction with
other permits necessary to carry out a discretionary land use entitlement
project.
         (c)   Discretionary land use entitlements shall not be considered
separately without a major tree conservation permit.
      (2)   Tree survey. Except as provided elsewhere in this section, all
applicants for major tree conservation permits shall be required to submit a
tree survey prepared by an environmental professional.
         (a)   The survey is a document that identifies, by common name,
certain species of trees of a specified DBH within a particular area.
         (b)   As required by the Community Development Director, the survey
shall list all existing and proposed trees, and shall specifically state
whether each tree is proposed to be destroyed, relocated, replaced, preserved
at its present location, or introduced into the development from an off-site
source.
         (c)   The Community Development Director may provide that the tree
survey exclude those portions of the site he or she determines will not be
affected by the development activity.
         (d)   Any tree survey required by this chapter must be dated within
six months of the tree removal permit application.
      (3)   Tree protection plan. 
         (a)   A tree protection plan shall be submitted with the tree
conservation permit, along with other discretionary permit drawings, as part of
the development permits process.
         (b)   The tree protection plan may either be a separate drawing or
part of a landscape plan.
         (c)   The tree protection plan shall include the following
information:
            1.   Definition of spatial limits:
               a.   Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading and
trenching;
               b.   Tree save areas;
               c.   Specimen trees; and
               d.   Areas of re-vegetation.
            2.   Detailed drawings of tree protection measures and their
location:
               a.   Location, species and size (DBH) of existing significant
trees, and an indication of which ones would remain on the site;
               b.   Tree fences;
               c.   Erosion control fences;
               d.   Tree protection signs;
               e.   Tree wells;
               f.   Aeration systems;
               g.   Transplanting specifications;
               h.   Staking specifications; and
               i.   Other applicable drawings as determined by the Director.
            3.   a.   Show all utility lines, existing and proposed, including
irrigation and electric lighting lines.
               b.   In order to prevent root damage within the critical root
zones of protected trees, and to minimize damage to trees located in protected
zones, the project applicant shall coordinate the location of these utility
lines with the utility companies.
            4.   Procedures and schedules for the implementation, installation
and maintenance of tree protection measures.
      (4)   Cash bonds. 
         (a)   1.   As a condition of the tree conservation permit, the
applicant shall submit a cash bond equal to the cost of the conservation
efforts outlined in the adopted plan, as determined by the city.
            2.   The bond shall be held for the purpose of assuring that the
conservation efforts are implemented.
         (b)   1.   If it is determined that practices violating any portion of
the municipal code have resulted in tree damage, then the city may require that
a cash bond, equal to the replacement value of the damaged tree(s), be
submitted.
            2.   The bond shall be held for the purpose of assuring that all
remedial actions required by the city to minimize tree damage are taken, and/or
for the purpose of assuring tree replacement should any damaged trees die or
show noticeable signs of decline, as determined by a certified arborist, within
a designated period of evaluation.
      (5)   Tree protection inspection.  
         (a)   Following the receipt of a complete application, the Community
Development Director shall schedule and conduct an inspection of the proposed
development site.
         (b)   The applicant or applicant's designee shall be advised as to the
date and time of the inspection, and given the opportunity to participate.
      (6)   Plan conformance.
         (a)   Following inspection, the plans shall be reviewed by the
Community Development Director for conformance with applicable general plan,
zoning ordinance, tree protection ordinance, and any applicable administrative
guidelines, and will either be approved or denied.
         (b)   Reasons for denial shall be noted on the tree protection plan or
otherwise stated in writing.
      (7)   No further approvals. No approvals for any discretionary permits,
grading permit, encroachment permit, construction permit or building permit
shall be approved until the tree protection plan and tree conservation permit
has been approved by the Community Development Director.
      (8)   Tree protection measures. All tree protection measures identified
in the tree protection plan and tree conservation permit shall be installed
prior to land disturbance.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.13 BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Issuance of a building or land development permit shall be conditioned
on the approved tree protection plan and tree conservation permit, and
conformance to the provisions of these regulations.
   (B)   Any permit may be voided if these terms are violated.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.14 PROTECTION OF TREES DURING CONSTRUCTION.
   Methods and standards for tree protection shall be in accordance with this
section.
   (A)   Trees identified to be preserved shall have four-foot, orange-tree-
protection fencing installed at the critical root zones.
   (B)   (1)   No person engaged in the construction of any structure(s) or
improvement(s) or any activity shall encroach or place solvents, material,
construction machinery or temporary soil deposits within six feet of the area
outside the critical root zone, as defined herein, of any existing significant
tree within a tree save area, transitional or undisturbed buffer zone.
      (2)   When proposed developments encroach into the crown dripline area of
any landmark/oak tree, special construction to allow the roots to breathe and
obtain water shall be engineered and implemented, as determined by the
Community Development Director.
   (C)   All tree protection devices must remain in functioning condition until
the project is completed or until the certificate of occupancy is issued.
   (D)   (1)   Any tree designated in the plan to be saved, which is
negligently damaged during construction or as a result of negligent
construction, as determined by the arborist, shall be treated according to
accepted National Arborists Association Standards.
      (2)   If fatally damaged, trees shall he replaced with six-inch-caliper
trees equal to five times the diameter of the tree removed.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.15 FINAL INSPECTION. 
   No certificate of occupancy or release of bonds shall be issued by the
Director with respect to any permit, unless and until a certified arborist
shall have inspected the site and confirmed that all existing trees to remain
are in healthy condition, and all replacement trees have been planted in
accordance with this section.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.16 UNDER-STORY VEGETATION. 
   (A)   Tree preservation areas shall leave intact the naturally occurring
groundcover and under-story vegetation, except where directed otherwise by the
Community Development Director, in order to allow the removal of undesirable
groundcover or under-story vegetation.
   (B)   The existing ground surface within crown dripline (measured
horizontally) of the trunk of any tree shall not be cut, filled, compacted or
paved, without the consent of the Director.
      (1)   Tree wells may be used when advisable.
      (2)   Excavation adjacent to any oak tree shall not be permitted where
material damage to the root system will result.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.17 TREE CONSERVATION PERMIT CRITERIA.
   (A)   The intended decision of the Community Development Director is to
conserve landmark/oak trees.
      (1)   Where protection of landmark/oak trees is not possible, the
Director shall attempt to avoid the destruction of trees using best forestry
practices.
      (2)   The Director’s decision shall be based upon reasonable standards,
including but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The condition of the landmark/oak tree with respect to its
general health, status as a public nuisance, danger of falling, proximity to
existing or proposed structures, interference with utility services, and its
status as host for plant, pest or disease endangering other species of trees or
plants with infection or infestations.
         (b)   The necessity of the requested action to allow construction of
improvements or otherwise allow economic or other reasonable enjoyment of
property.
         (c)   The topography of the land and the effect of the requested
action on soil retention, water retention, and diversion or increased flow of
surface waters.
         (d)   The number, species, size and location of existing trees in the
area, and the effect of the requested action on shade areas, air pollution,
historic values, scenic beauty, and the general welfare of the city as a whole.
         (e)   Best forestry practices such as, but not limited to, the number
of healthy trees the subject parcel of land will support.
   (B)   (1)   Any tree that is removed shall be replaced with trees that are a
species deemed acceptable to the Community Development Director.
      (2)   If a deciduous tree is to be removed, then at least 75% of the DBH
inches to be replaced must be with deciduous trees.
   (C)   Unless otherwise stated in these rules, the removal of any six-inch
tree or six-inch grouping of landmark/oak trees must be replaced on a caliper-
inch-per-caliper-inch basis.
      (1)   Any six-inch DBH tree that is not a landmark/oak tree must be
replaced with oak trees, the total DBH of which is equal to 40% of the total
DBH inches removed.
      (2)   No replacement tree may be less than 2-1/2 inches DBH.
   (D)   In the intended decision on an application for a permit, the Community
Development Director may attach reasonable conditions to insure compliance with
the stated purposes of this chapter.
      (1)   The issuance of a tree removal permit may be conditioned upon
mitigation.
      (2)   Mitigation may consist of the planting of replacement trees at the
sole expense of the applicant and/or the payment by the applicant into the
Landmark/Oak Maintenance Fund.
      (3)   Any such intended decision shall include a statement for the
reasons for the decision.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.18 NOTICE OF ACTION AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Notice of the Community Development Director's intended decision shall
be given by personal delivery or first class mail to the applicant, and to any
person filing a written request with the Director for notice of all permit
approvals under this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Any person aggrieved or affected by the Director's intended
decision, or any member of the City Council, may appeal the intended decision
to the Planning Commission, by filing a written notice of appeal with the City
Clerk within five days, excluding weekends and holidays, after the delivery or
mailing of the notice.
      (2)   Any such notice of appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee in
the amount specified by the City Council.
   (C)   (1)   If no appeal is filed within such time, the Director shall
promptly implement the intended decision by denying or issuing the permit, with
or without conditions.
      (2)   An appeal automatically stays execution of the implementation of
the intended decision until the appeal has been considered and decided by the
Planning Commission.
   (D)   (1)   The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall place all such
appeals on the agenda of the next regular Council meeting, and shall give
notice to the applicant and/or appellant.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall consider and decide all issues raised
in the appeal.
   (E)   (1)   The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the
City Council in accordance with established city procedures.
      (2)   The decision of the City Council shall be final.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
TREE CONSERVATION STANDARDS
§ 156.25 EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   In case of an emergency caused by the dangerous condition of a
landmark or oak tree requiring immediate action for the protection of life or
property, a tree may be cut down, in whole or in part, on the order of the
Director or any on-duty member of the Public Works/County Sheriff's Department.
   (B)   Public utilities subject to the jurisdiction of the California Public
Utilities Commission may also take such action as may be necessary to maintain
a safe operation for their facilities.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.26 I.S.A. PRUNING STANDARDS.
   (A)   That certain document known and designated as Pruning Standards, dated
1995, as prepared by the Western Chapter of the International Society of
Arboriculture Certification Committee, and all subsequent updates as and when
adopted by the Society, is adopted by the City Council as the standards for
pruning trees located within the city, to all intents and purposes and to the
same effect as if each and every section, paragraph, subparagraph, word, phase,
clause or illustration contained therein were fully set forth herein, except
for the deletion of any provisions as provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   A copy of these pruning standards is filed in the Office of the City
Clerk.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.27 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the Director in his or her capacity as
enforcement officer.
   (B)   In the enforcement of this chapter, the enforcement officer and his or
her deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine any oak tree,
and may issue citations for any violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.28 PUBLIC ASSISTANCE FOR PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   If the Director determines that a property owner, who has submitted a
letter with an intent to prune a landmark or oak tree, cannot properly prune it
without the assistance of a professional tree trimmer, and that such property
owner cannot afford to hire a professional tree trimmer because he or she does
not have the financial resources to pay for such services, the Director may
provide financial assistance to the property owner for the purpose of pruning
the tree or trees, if all the following conditions are met, and funds are
available:
      (1)   The property owner uses the property where the tree(s) is(are)
located as his or her principal place of residence; and
      (2)   The aggregate gross income of all persons 18 years of age or older
residing on the property does not exceed the moderate income range for the
county as may be set from time to time; and
      (3)   The Director determines that it is necessary to prune the tree(s)
to remove hazardous conditions, disease, rot, pests or other harmful
conditions, or to promote the healthy growth of the tree(s).
   (B)   Such financial assistance may include, but not be limited to, low
interest loans; work done by the city with the cost borne, in part or in whole,
by the property owner; work done by the city with the cost borne by the city,
to be repaid by the property owner upon such terms as the city and property
owner shall agree; or any combination thereof.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.29 LANDMARK/OAK TREE MAINTENANCE FUND.
   For purposes of providing such financial assistance as described in §
156.28, there is hereby established the “Landmark/Oak Tree Maintenance Fund,”
which shall be funded, either in part or in whole, by those portions of fines
known as “penalty assessments,” which may be assessed by the courts for
violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.30 TREE CONSERVATION DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   (A)   The City Council shall, by resolution, adopt guidelines for
commercial, industrial and residential development and construction on property
within the city, and city-initiated projects, where any oak tree is located.
   (B)   Such guidelines adopted pursuant to this section shall be made a part
of this section, and shall be enforced as hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.31 CITY PROJECTS.
   (A)   City-initiated projects should comply with the guidelines for
landmark/oak tree conservation.
   (B)    If a landmark/oak tree is to be removed resulting from a city-
initiated project, then the City Council shall make a finding of overriding
considerations necessitating the removal of the tree.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
NUISANCE ABATEMENT
§ 156.40 NUISANCES.
   (A)   It is declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing,
occupying or having charge of any premises in the city with one or more oak
trees located thereon, to intentionally, negligently, accidentally, or
otherwise maintain such premises in such a manner so as to cause harm to and of
such oak trees, by reason of any of the following conditions:
      (1)   Water saturation or deprivation;
      (2)   Nailing, screwing, stapling, bolting or otherwise attaching boards,
fences, signs, placards, posters or other material that might cause injury to
the oak tree;
      (3)   Neglect in the pruning or trimming of overgrown, diseased,
decaying, dead or rotting limbs, branches and foliage.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever any premises or oak tree or trees exist, or are
permitted to exist, within the city contrary to these provisions, the City
Council, by resolution, may declare the same to be a public nuisance.
      (2)   Such resolution shall declare the intention of the City Council to
commence abatement proceedings, as herein provided, and shall refer to the
street and number under which it is officially or commonly known, and describe
the property upon which such nuisance exists by giving the legal description of
the land.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.41 ABATEMENT.
   All premises or oak trees declared to be such public nuisances and ordered
to be abated, may be abated by watering, conditioning the soil, constructing
berms, pruning or trimming, or removing offending materials affixed to the tree
that might cause injury to such trees, pursuant to the procedures set forth in
this code.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.42 NOTICE OF HEARING TO ABATE.
   (A)   Within 30 days of its passage, the Secretary of the Planning
Commission shall cause a certified copy of the resolution of the City Council
to be conspicuously posted on the premises where the oak tree(s) is(are)
located.
   (B)   Such notice shall be titled “NOTICE OF HEARING” in letters of not less
than one inch in height, and shall be substantially in the following form:
   NOTICE OF HEARING
   TO ABATE NUISANCE
Notice is hereby given that on the day of              , the City Council of
the City of Riverbank passed a resolution, declaring that certain landmark/oak
tree(s) located or standing upon that certain lot, piece or parcel of land,
situated in the City of Riverbank, State of California, known and designated
as, in said city, and more particularly described as Lot No.      , Tract No.
    , or name of subdivision in said city, constitutes a public nuisance and
must be abated by the rehabilitation of such premises by the watering, pruning,
trimming or other methods; otherwise said nuisance will be abated by the
municipal authorities of the city, in which case the cost of such
rehabilitation, watering, pruning or trimming will be assessed upon the land on
which said landmark/oak tree(s) is or are located, and such cost will
constitute a lien upon such land until paid. (Reference is hereby made to said
resolution for further particulars.)
   (C)   In accordance with these provisions, the Secretary of the Planning
Commission shall cause to be served upon the owner of each of the landmark/oak
tree(s) declared to be a public nuisance and sought to be rehabilitated by
watering, pruning or trimming, one copy of such notice, and a certified copy of
the resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   As aforesaid, such notices and resolutions must be posted and served
at least 30 days before the time fixed for the hearing before the City Council,
and proof of posting and service of such notices and resolutions shall be made
by affidavit filed with the City Council.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.43 FORM OF PROPER SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   (A)   Proper service of such notice and resolution shall be by personal
service upon the person owning the property, as such person's name and address
appears on the last equalized assessment roll, if he or she is found within the
city limits.
   (B)   If he or she is not to be found within the city limits, proper service
shall be by depositing a copy of such notice and resolution in the United
States Post Office at Riverbank, California, properly enclosed in a sealed
envelope with the posting thereon fully prepaid.
      (1)   Such mail shall be registered or certified, and addressed to such
owner at his or her last known address.
      (2)   The service is complete at the time of deposit.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.44 HEARING BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   At the time stated in the notice, the Planning Commission shall hear
and consider all objections or protests; shall receive testimony and other
evidence from owners, witnesses and parties interested relative to the alleged
public nuisance, and as to rehabilitation of the premises by the watering,
pruning or trimming, or by other abatement thereof; and may continue the
hearing from time to time.
   (B)   (1)   Upon the conclusion of such hearing, the City Council shall
allow or overrule any or all protests.
      (2)   If the Planning Commission finds that good and sufficient cause
does exist why the premises should be rehabilitated, or landmark/oak tree(s)
should be watered pruned, trimmed or treated, the Planning Commission shall
prepare and file a report of such findings with the City Clerk.
   (C)   Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission may by
resolution order the Director to abate the nuisance, after a period of 30 days,
by having the oak tree(s) watered, pruned, trimmed, treated, or the nuisance
otherwise abated, and the Director and his or her authorized representatives
are hereby expressly authorized to enter upon private property for that
purpose.
   (D)   If a person or persons desires to appeal a decision of the Planning
Commission regarding the provisions of this chapter, they may do so in the
manner prescribed by the adopted city municipal code.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.45 SERVICE ON OWNER OF RESOLUTION TO ABATE.
   (A)   In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, a copy of the
resolution ordering the Director to abate the nuisance shall be served upon the
owner of the property, and shall contain a detailed list of needed corrections.
   (B)   Any property owner shall have the right to have any such oak tree(s)
watered, pruned, trimmed, treated, or the nuisance otherwise abated, at his or
her own expense; provided the same is completed prior to the expiration of the
time set forth in the resolution.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.46 RECORD OF COST FOR ABATEMENT.
   (A)   The Director shall keep an account of the cost (including incidental
expenses) of abating such nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land where
the work has been done.
   (B)   The Director shall render an itemized report, in writing, to the City
Council, showing the cost of watering, pruning, trimming or treating the oak
tree(s), and incidental expenses, on each separate lot or parcel of land;
provided that, before it is submitted to the City Council:
      (1)   A copy of the report shall be posted for at least five days upon
the premises or property upon which such oak tree(s) is(are) situated, or the
nuisance committed, together with a notice of the time when the report shall be
submitted to the City Council for confirmation.
      (2)   A copy of the report and notice shall be served upon the owner of
the property at least five days prior to submitting the same to the Planning
Commission, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Proof of such posting and service shall be made by affidavit and filed
with the Planning Commission Secretary.
   (D)   The term INCIDENTAL EXPENSES shall include, but not be limited to, the
expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications
and contacts, in inspecting the work, and the costs of printing and mailing
required hereunder.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.47 HEARING AND PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   At the date and time fixed for it receipt and consideration, the
Planning Commission shall hear and pass upon the report of the Director,
together with any objection or protests which may be raised by any of the
owners of property liable to be assessed for the work of abating such nuisance,
and by any other interested persons.
   (B)   Thereupon, the Planning Commission may make such revision, correction
or modification in the report as it may deem just, after which, by resolution,
the report, as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be
confirmed; provided that the hearing or consideration may be continued from
time to time.
   (C)   The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City
Council in the manner prescribed in the municipal code.
   (D)   Any decision the City Council may make on all protests and objections
shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.48 ASSIGNMENT OF COSTS AGAINST PROPERTY; LIEN.
   (A)   The amount of the costs of abating such nuisance upon any lot or
parcel of land, as confirmed by the City Council, shall constitute a special
assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land, and as thus keep a
lien on the property for the amount of such assessment.
   (B)   After the confirmation of the report, a copy shall be turned over to
the County Assessor and the County Tax Collector, acting on behalf of the city,
whereupon it shall be their duty to add the amounts of the respective
assessments to the next regular bills of taxes levied against the respective
lots and parcels for land for municipal purposes.
      (1)   Thereafter, such amounts shall be collected at the same time and in
the same manner as other municipal taxes are collected.
      (2)   Thereafter, such amounts shall also be subject to the same
penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of
delinquency as provided for other municipal taxes.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.49 CIVIL REMEDIES.
   In addition to any other remedies provided by this chapter, the city shall
have the following judicial remedies available for violations of this chapter
or any permit condition promulgated under this chapter.
   (A)   The city may institute a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to establish liability and to recover damages for any injury
caused by the removal of trees in contravention of the terms of this chapter.
   (B)   The city may institute a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to seek injunctive relief to enforce compliance with this chapter
to enjoin any violation, and to seek injunctive relief to prevent irreparable
injury to the trees or properties encompassed by the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.50 AUTHORITY.
   Any and all nuisances declared and abated hereunder shall be processed
pursuant to the authority set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 38771 et seq., in the
manner described herein above.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any abatement order provided in this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of an infraction.
   (B)   (1)   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to remove a
landmark/oak tree without a permit, or to fail to have a removal permit in
one's immediate possession during the course of removing an oak tree, or for
any person to violate any provision of a major tree conservation permit.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter
as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions
of this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting
attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction
pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 19c.
   (C)   Any violation of any provision of minor tree conservation permit shall
be deemed an infraction and be punishable upon conviction as hereinafter set
forth.
   (D)   (1)   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 and/or six months in the county
jail.
      (2)   Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a separate
offense.
   (E)   (1)   Any person convicted of an infraction of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500.
      (2)   Each day the violation continues shall be regarded as a new and
separate offense.
   (F)   (1)   Upon a person’s conviction of any violation under this chapter,
the court shall, in addition to or in lieu of any other penalty provided and
imposed under the chapter, order the defendant to pay a civil penalty
assessment to the Landmark/Oak Maintenance Fund, as described in §
156.29 herein, which is designed as restitution to compensate the city and the
community for the loss or diminution of economic, aesthetic, environmental and
property values resulting from the loss of any oak tree or portion thereof, and
for the city's costs and attorney's fees in prosecuting the matter.
      (2)   Such civil penalty shall reflect true value of the oak tree, based
upon such factors as size, location and age.
   (G)   Such assessments will be used to provide financial assistance to those
property owners qualifying for such assistance under §
156.28 herein.
   (H)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter may result in the
immediate suspension of any permit previously issued for the construction and/
or development of property upon which the violation occurred, until compliance
with all mitigation measures required by this chapter is demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Director.
(Ord. 2006-009, passed 5-8-06)
CHAPTER 157: WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION
Section
   
157.01   Purpose and intent
   
157.02   Applicability
   
157.03   Water conservation definition
   
157.04   Process
   
157.05   Development standards
§ 157.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish landscaping
regulations that are intended to:
   (A)   Enhance the aesthetic appearance of development in all areas of the
city by providing development standards relating to quality, quantity and
functional aspects of landscaping and landscape screening.
   (B)   Increase compatibility between residential and abutting commercial and
industrial uses.
   (C)   Reduce the heat and glare generated by development.
   (D)   Establish a water conservation plan to reduce water consumption in the
landscape environment using conservation principles important to the State of
California and the City of Riverbank.
   (E)   Protect public health, safety, and welfare by minimizing the impact of
all forms of physical and visual pollution, controlling soil erosion, screening
incompatible land uses, preserving the integrity of neighborhoods, and
enhancing pedestrian and vehicular traffic and safety.
   (F)   Comply with the California Department of Water Resources Model Water
Efficient Landscape Ordinance as contained in Title 23, Division 2, Chapter 2.7
of the California Code of Regulations and the California Green Building
Standards of 2022 and/or these standards as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2020-003, passed 2-11-20; Am. Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-24-23)
§ 157.02 APPLICABILITY.
   All new development in the city shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter and the requirements of the State Model Water Efficient Landscape
Ordinance referenced above, which is incorporated herein by this reference. All
required landscaping shall be installed by the developer and approved by the
Development Services Department prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for any building, unless other arrangements are agreed to by the
Community Development Director.
   (A)   Exceptions. The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section:
      (1)   Yards and landscape areas for single family homes when not
installed by the builder or developer prior to or as a condition of home sales.
      (2)   Interior remodels, tenant improvements and demolitions.
      (3)   Changes of use to any existing building.
      (4)   Replacement or repair of existing plant material or irrigation
systems in conjunction with routine maintenance of existing projects.
      (5)   Modifications or additions to existing structures which do not
result in an increase of more than 10% of the floor area, or 1,000 square feet,
whichever is greater.
   (B)   Statutory authority in case of conflicting provisions. Nothing in this
section shall be deemed to affect, annul or abrogate any other laws or
ordinances pertaining or applicable to the properties and areas affected by
this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-005, passed 6-10-14)
§ 157.03 WATER CONSERVATION DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WATER CONSERVATION. This definition shall mean a combination of landscape
features and techniques that in the aggregate reduce the demand for and
consumption of water, including but not limited to appropriate low water using
plants, nonliving groundcover, a low percentage of turf coverage, permeable
paving and water conserving irrigation techniques and systems, and other water
saving techniques and measures approved by the Community Development Services
Department.
(Ord. 2014-005, passed 6-10-14)
§ 157.04 PROCESS.
   The Community Development Director shall establish a format for landscape
plans and any other procedural guidelines for submittal as deemed necessary.
   (A)   Plans required. Plans for the development of required landscaping
shall be submitted to the Development Services Department for review and
approval prior to the issuance of any building permit or as may be required for
a site plan permit. Said plans shall be prepared by a licensed landscape
architect, landscape contractor, architect or certified irrigation designer.
   (B)   Plan review and approval. The Community Development Services
Department shall review each project and proposed landscape plan for compliance
with the landscape and water conservation requirements.
   (C)   Alternative means of compliance. The Community Development Director
may allow alternative means of complying with the requirements in this section
provided the alternative achieves results comparable to those achieved through
strict application of the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 2014-005, passed 6-10-14)
§ 157.05 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Required. In the following designated districts, not less than the
stipulated percent of gross site area shall be landscaped in accordance with
this section:
Landscape Area Requirements
Zone District Required Landscaping (Gross % of site)
Landscape Area Requirements
Zone District Required Landscaping (Gross % of site)
R-1/PD        30
R-2           30 (a)
R-3           30 (a)
C-1/PD        10 (c)
C-2           10 (c)
C-M           7.5 (c)
M-1/PD        7.5 (b)(o)
M-2           7.5 (b) 5 (c)
CX-1          10 (c)
 
      (1)   In multiple-family developments of 12 or more dwelling units, 10%
of the total building site shall be set aside and landscaped for the purposes
of common recreational open space. Such 10% may be included in the general
landscaping requirements.
      (2)   This requirement may be waived by the Community Development
Director for remodeling, alterations, or renovations to existing buildings and
developments on parcels or building sites where an existing building occupies a
substantial portion of the site and there exists limited space to landscape
because of the front yard or corner street side yard setback areas.
      (3)   In commercial and industrial districts, where a lot larger than
10,000 square feet is to be developed in phases, the Community Development
Director may determine that only the developed portion of the site need be
landscaped. Provision shall be made, however, to insure that the landscape
requirement can still be met upon full development of the site. This exception
shall not apply to any setback along a public street which shall be landscaped
upon the initial development of the site. Open areas (areas not landscaped)
shall be continuously maintained free of weeds, litter and debris, and shall
not become a source of nuisance to adjoining property.
   (B)   Determination of landscaped areas. In determining landscaped areas,
setbacks, when landscaped, private patios and all other areas not occupied by
buildings, parking lots, vehicle storage areas, and driveways shall be
included. Areas occupied by clubhouses, recreation buildings, pools, saunas,
inter walkways, and similar amenities may be included as landscaped areas. In
industrial zoning districts, areas planted along a public right-of-way shall
qualify as one and one-half (1.5) times the area toward the overall required
landscaping area.
   (C)   Landscape materials and placement. All landscape areas shall
demonstrate a recognizable pattern or theme for the overall development. To
accomplish this, new landscaping and landscape areas shall conform to the
following:
      (1)   Plant materials shall be selected for maintenance efficiency,
drought tolerance and adaptability and relationship to Riverbank's environment
and climate. Trees and shrubs in reasonable numbers shall be used in the
landscape design; ground cover alone shall not be acceptable. No one species of
plant shall exceed 20% of the plant material. Landscaped areas shall
incorporate a minimum of two of the following plantings: (1) grasses and ground
covers, (2) shrubs, and (3) trees.
      (2)   In all commercial (C) and industrial (M) districts, plant materials
shall be sized and spaced to achieve immediate effect and shall normally not be
less than 24-inch box for parking lot shade trees, 15 gallon container for
trees, five gallon container for shrubs, and a one gallon container for mass
planting. Non-turf areas, such as shrub beds, shall be top dressed with a bark
chip mulch or approved alternative.
      (3)   Turf shall be limited to 25% of the total landscaped area in all
commercial (C) and industrial (M) districts. In residential districts turf
shall not exceed 50% of the total landscaped area.
   (D)   Landscape irrigation. Provisions shall be made for a permanent "in
place" irrigation system to all landscaped areas required herein, including
street tree wells. All new irrigation systems shall use Xeriscaping principles
including such techniques and materials as low precipitation sprinkler heads,
bubblers, drip irrigation systems, timing devices and moisture sensors. All
irrigation systems must be designed to comply with the "State Model Water
Efficient Landscape Ordinance" and shall minimize overspray onto impervious
surfaces, such as building, sidewalks, parking areas, and the like, through the
use of such techniques as low-trajectory spray nozzles or underground low
volume applicators. All irrigation system controllers shall be set in
compliance with the day and hour watering requirements of the city and shall be
designed to minimize water use by installing automatic systems such as multi-
start controllers and soil moisture sensors.
   (E)   Site preparation and installation.
      (1)   Prior to the planting of any materials, the compacted soils
surrounding a building site will be returned to a friable condition. Friable
condition shall mean returning the soil to an easily crumbled or loosely
compacted condition down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements,
whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread
unimpeded. The soil must be returned to a friable condition to a minimum depth
as required for the planting material.
      (2)   Trees should be adequate in trunk diameter to support the top area
of the tree. Trees, shrubs, and vines should have body and fullness that is
typical of the species.
      (3)   All ground cover should be healthy, densely foliated, and well
rooted cuttings, or one-gallon container plants.
      (4)   The spacing of trees and shrubs should be appropriate to the
species used. The plant materials should be spaced so that they do not
interfere with the adequate lighting of the premises or restrict access to
emergency apparatus such as fire hydrants or fire alarm boxes. Proper spacing
should also insure unobstructed access for vehicles and pedestrians in addition
to providing clear vision of the intersections from approaching vehicles. Plant
material should conform to the following spacing standards:
         (a)   A minimum of 25 feet from the property corner at a street
intersection to the center of the first tree or large shrub.
         (b)   A minimum of 15 feet between center of trees and large shrubs to
light standards.
         (c)   A minimum of 15 feet between center of trees or large shrubs and
fire hydrants.
         (d)   A minimum of 15 feet from the intersection of a driveway with a
street right-of-way to the center of any tree having a diameter larger than 18
inches at maturity or large shrub.
   (F)   Maintenance. Required planting areas shall be permanently maintained.
As used in this section, "maintained" includes: watering, weeding, pruning,
insect control, and replacement of plant materials and irrigation equipment as
needed to preserve the health and appearance of plant materials.
   (G)   Parking lot landscaping. Parking lots and parking structures shall
have interior and perimeter landscaping areas as prescribed by the following:
      (1)   Parking lots or parking structures adjoining street property lines
or public streets shall have a perimeter landscape buffer with a minimum width
as follows:
         (a)   If abutting an expressway: 20 feet.
         (b)   If abutting an arterial: 15 feet.
         (c)   If abutting a collector: 15 feet.
         (d)   If abutting a local collector: 10 feet.
         (e)   If abutting a local street: five feet.
      (2)   Vehicle overhang may encroach a maximum of two feet into landscape
areas which are a minimum of ten feet wide.
      (3)   An average three foot high (minimum two and one-half foot and
maximum three and one-half foot) continuous screen shall be installed between
all parking areas and public streets. A screen shall consist of one or any
combination of the following:
         (a)   Walls. A wall shall consist of concrete, concrete block, stone,
brick, tile or similar type of solid masonry material.
         (b)   Berms. A berm shall be constructed of earthen materials and it
shall be landscaped.
         (c)   Solid fences. A solid fence shall be constructed of wood, or
other materials.
         (d)   Plant materials. Vegetation, consisting of trees or shrubs.
      (4)   Interior landscaped areas shall be a minimum of five feet in width,
exclusive of curbs.
      (5)   The end of each row of parking stalls shall be separated from aisle
ways by a landscaped planter or sidewalk.
      (6)   In all parking lots with a capacity of five parking spaces or more,
a minimum of one shade tree for every five spaces shall be provided in
landscape islands within the parking lot. Tree spacing shall be such that every
designated parking space is within 30 feet of the trunk of a tree.
      (7)   All planting areas within or abutting a parking lot shall be
protected with raised concrete curbs.
   (H)   Landscaping in rights-of-way. All land area within the public right-
of-way adjoining all sides of any parcel or building site that is not otherwise
covered with a building, structure, paving, or similar impervious surface shall
be landscaped and maintained in conjunction with the landscaping installed on
the adjoining property as regulated in this chapter. Landscaping within the
right-of-way shall not be used when determining the required percentage of
landscaping area as required in this chapter.
      (1)   Design. The design of the landscaping of the public right-of-way
shall be included in the landscape plan and shall meet the requirements set
forth in this chapter. Adequate space shall be provided in the landscape area
to allow free, unrestricted growth and development of the landscaping and
street trees.
      (2)   Street trees. Street trees shall be planted in accordance with the
Theme Street List, as it may be amended from time to time, or as otherwise set
forth in the
Chapter 96: Trees relating to street trees and in accordance with the street
tree planting standards as established by the City Engineer.
   (I)   Driveway and corner visibility. All landscaping material shall be
maintained in accordance with the provisions of §
96.12.
   (J)   Landscaping along walls. All solid walls over three feet in height
that are adjacent to public streets or right-of-ways shall comply with one of
the following:
      (1)   Be fully landscaped with vines and/or other plant materials to
prevent the placement of graffiti. All landscaping shall include the
installation of a permanent irrigation system.
      (2)   If not landscaped, shall be constructed of split-face concrete,
brick or some other type of material that will discourage the placement of
graffiti.
   (K)   Landscape screening of Residential (R) properties. Where a commercial
or industrial site adjoins a Residential (R) District, screening which is at
least 75% opaque shall be provided. Where fences are required, such fencing
shall be landscaped as appropriate.
   (L)   Model homes. To promote landscape water conservation through
education, all single family residential developments with more than two model
homes to be constructed by a developer, shall provide for landscaping the
models entirely with water saving landscaping and irrigation in accordance with
the following requirements:
      (1)   Plant materials. Each "water saving" model home to be landscaped
shall contain exclusively low water use plant materials as identified on a
suggested planting list available from the Community Development Department or
approved by the Community Development Director.
      (2)   Irrigation system. Each "water saving" model home shall contain
exclusively an irrigation system that provides a high efficiency in water
application according to site conditions. (Drip or trickle may not be used in
turf areas).
      (3)   Signs. Each development with "water saving" model homes shall
provide the following information to potential buyers:
         (a)   Front yard sign. A four square foot sign shall be located in the
front yard of each "water saving" model such that it is clearly visible to
buyers. The sign shall indicate that the model features a water saving
landscape and irrigation design.
         (b)   Interior display. A drawing, or combination of drawings, shall
be displayed inside each "water saving" model or the sales office which
provides a schematic of the landscape. These drawings shall include a key
identifying the common name of the plants used in the "water saving" model
yards. A brochure with the same information may be distributed with the sales
information to potential buyers to satisfy this requirement.
      (4)   Literature. Additional literature describing water conserving
landscaping and irrigation shall also be made available to the potential buyer
and displayed.
(Ord. 2014-005, passed 6-10-14)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to California Statutes
References to 1967 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO CALIFORNIA STATUTES
Business and Professions Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                               Code Section
Division 2, Ch. 10.5 (comm. with § 4600)119.02
4600 et seq.                             119.02,
                                         119.11
4609                                     119.08
8771                                     152.041
11003.2                                  152.010
11004                                    152.010
12703                                    135.09
12733                                    135.09
16000 et seq.                            Ch. 110
19300.5                                  127.01
21600 - 21609                            135.01
23004                                    134.03
26000 et seq.                            120.02
26001                                    120.02,
                                         134.03
26100 et seq.                            120.02
                                         
 
Civil Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite      Code Section
714(c)(iii)     150.16
783             152.010,
                152.055
798 et seq.     121.02,
                121.04
798.21          121.04
798.45          121.04
801.5(a)(1)-(2) 150.16
1351(d)         152.002
1351(f)         152.002
1941.1          121.02
1941.2          121.02
2080-2080.9     36.03
2929.3          98.07
3479 et seq.    98.03
4080            150.17
 
Civil Procedure Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                                                            Code
                                                                      Section
Art. III (comm. § § 415.10 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 92.40
415.10 et seq.                                                        131.13
683.110 - 683.220                                                     99.16
697.340                                                               99.16
731                                                                   120.61
                                                                      53.23,
1094.5                                                                121.08,
                                                                      123.14
                                                                      36.05,
                                                                      53.23,
1094.6                                                                98.17,
                                                                      99.12,
                                                                      121.08,
                                                                      123.14
1263.010 et seq.                                                      152.037
                                                                      
 
Education Code
 
State Cite                                                       Code Section
Title 2, Division 4, Part 27, Ch. 9, Art. 13 (commencing with § 50.09
49580)
94900                                                            119.11
94901                                                            119.11
                                                                 
 
Elections Code
 
State Cite Code Section
21601      30.03
 
Government Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite           Code Section
Ch. 3, Title 7       32.30
17                   152.010
905                  36.04
910 - 915.2          36.04
935                  36.04
945 - 946            36.04
6062                 131.13
6063                 98.17
6250 et seq.         50.19
6500                 37.01
6700                 70.01
8500 et seq.         37.01
8610                 37.01
Article 9, § 86.05  37.05
                     92.44,
11513(a), (b), (c)   98.18,
                     120.62
25845                90.14
27321.5(a)           98.07
34851                31.03
36516                30.02
36900                10.15
36901                10.99
36903                10.99
36904                10.99
36937                10.15
37101                Ch. 110
37209                31.05
37700 et seq.        31.05
38771 et seq.        156.50
38772                131.13
38773 et seq.        131.13
38773                118.27
38773.1              118.27
38773.2              131.13
                     53.15,
38773.5              98.22,
                     98.24,
                     118.27
38773.6              131.13
39501 et seq.        98.03
39560 et seq.        98.03
40605                32.03
40802 - 40805        31.05
40805.5              31.05
50022.2              150.01
50050 et seq.        95.24
51030 et seq.        119.01
51034(c)(6)          119.14
53069.4              92.41
53069.4(b)           120.62
53069.5              131.12
54954.6              98.23
65000 et seq.        32.35
65091             153.215
65300 et seq.        32.35
65302                151.01
65450 et seq.        153.305,
                     153.306
65451                153.311
65850.5              150.16
65850.7              150.17
65915                153.185
65453                153.310
65560                151.01
65800                151.01
65852.2              152.010,
                     153.325
65852.2(f)           153.328
65852.22             153.325,
                     153.327
65864 et seq.        120.20
66410 et seq.        152.002,
                     152.003
66412                152.010
66412.1              152.010
66412.2              152.010
66424                152.002,
                     152.141
66424.5(a)           152.002
66424.5(b)           152.002
66426(a),(b),(c),(d) 152.002
66427.1              152.171
66427.4              152.172
66436                152.073
66442                152.073
66449                152.094
66450                152.094
66451.2              152.173
66451.10 et seq.     152.112
66452(a)             152.002
66452.8(c)(1)        152.174
66456.1              152.070
66462.5              152.074
66469 et seq.        152.077,
                     152.096
66473.1              152.042
66474.2              152.060
66477                152.037
66478                152.036
66478.1 et seq.      152.059
66479 et seq.        152.035
66483                152.034,
                     152.038
66492 et seq.        152.073
66499 et seq.        152.076
66499.3(b)           152.076
66499.37             152.059,
                     152.093
66499.7              152.076
82007                36.02
91500 et seq.        32.20
                     
 
Health and Safety Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                                                 Code Section
Division 2, Ch. 1                                          120.02
Division 2, Ch. 3.01                                       120.02
Division 2, Ch. 3.2                                        120.02
Division 2, Ch. 8                                          120.02
Division 2, Ch. 8.5                                        120.02
1136.7 et seq.                                             120.02
1596.76                                                    120.02
8550 et seq.                                               152.010
11014.5                                                    125.01
11018                                                   34.70
11018.5                                                    127.01
                                                           118.13,
11054 - 11058                                              119.08,
                                                           119.10,
                                                           130.16
11350 - 11400                                              130.08
11362.5                                                    120.02
11362.7                                                    120.02
11362.765                                                  120.02
11550                                                      119.08,
                                                           119.10
11590                                                      118.13
12500 et seq.                                              92.41
12505                                                      92.20,
                                                           92.40
12508                                                      92.20,
                                                           92.40
12529                                                      92.20,
                                                           92.40
12557                                                      92.41
12561                                                      92.20,
                                                           92.40
12562                                                      92.20,
                                                           92.40
12578                                                      92.20
12706                                                      92.43
13950 et seq.                                              92.10
17021.5                                                    153.003
17021.6                                                    153.003
17920.3                                                    98.03
17953 et seq.                                              152.140
17958.1                                                    153.003
18008                                                      153.003,
                                                           153.219
18010                                                      153.003
18200 et seq.                                              121.02
18941.5                                                    150.01
25117                                                      53.03,
                                                           53.06
25500 et seq.                                              53.12
39730.5                                                    50.01
39730.6                                                    50.01
39730.7                                                    50.01
39730.8                                                    50.01
113781                                                     50.01
113783                                                     50.01
113789                                                     50.01
113841                                                     50.01
113842                                                     50.01
114079                                                     50.09
Division 104, Part 9, Ch. 8     (commencing with § 114950.01
Division 104, Part 14 (commencing with § 117600)          50.01
116800 et seq.                                             52.35
118875 et seq.                                             92.50
119300 et seq.                                             125.05,
                                                           125.07
18941.5                                                    150.01
                                                           
 
Labor Code
 
State Cite Code Section
6404.5     123.03
 
Penal Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite        Code Section
19                10.99
19c               156.99
136.1             130.16
186.10            130.16
186.22(e)(1)-(23) 130.16
186.22(f)         130.08,
                  130.16
186.22a           130.17
186.22a(a)        130.17
187 et seq.       130.16
203               130.16
205               130.16
206               130.16
207               130.16
215               130.16
243.4             118.13
245               130.16
246               130.16
261               130.16,
                  118.13
261.5             118.13
262               118.13
266               119.08,
                  119.10
                  118.09,
266a              118.13,
                  119.08,
                  119.10
                  118.09,
266b              118.13,
                  119.08,
                  119.10
266c              118.09,
                  118.13
                  118.13,
266d              119.08,
                  119.10
                  118.09,
266e              118.13,
                  119.08,
                  119.10
                  118.13,
266f              119.08,
                  119.10
                  118.09,
266g              118.13,
                  119.08,
                  119.10
                  118.09,
266h              118.13,
                  119.08,
                  119.10
                  118.09,
266i              118.13,
                  119.08,
                  119.10
266j              118.13
267               118.13
                  118.11,
290               118.13,
                  119.08,
                  119.10
309               118.13
311.2 - 311.6     118.13
311 - 313.4       118.11
311.2 - 311.6     118.13
311.10            118.13
311.11            118.13
313.1             118.13
                  118.13,
314               119.08,
                  119.10
                  118.09,
                  118.11,
315               118.13,
                  119.08,
                  119.10
                  118.09,
316               118.11,
                  119.08,
                  119.10
                  118.11,
318               118.13,
                  119.08,
                  119.10
                  112.02 -
326.5             112.04,
                  112.18
326.5(h)          112.38
326.5(k)(1)       112.41
326.5(k)(2)       112.41
326.5(k)(3)       112.41
326.5(l)(2)       112.17
336               118.13
370               98.03
371               98.03
415               119.08,
                  119.10
450 et seq.       130.16
459               130.16
463               130.16
487               130.16
487h              130.16
518               130.16
520               130.16
594               131.12
594               131.14
594(b)(1)         130.16
594.3             131.14
594.4             131.14
602               131.14
640.5             131.14
640.6             131.14
640.7             131.14
                  118.09,
647(a)            118.13,
                  119.08,
                  119.10
                  118.09,
                  118.11,
647(b)            118.13,
                  119.08,
                  119.10
                  118.09,
647(d)            118.13,
                  119.08,
                  119.10
647.6             118.13
830 et seq.       90.01
836.5             10.24
853.6             10.32
853.6(a)          10.30
853.7             10.31
853.8             10.32
1203.4            119.07,
                  119.09
11105             35.03
11225 et seq.     98.03,
                  119.08
12034(a),(b)      130.16
12072             130.16
12101(a)(1)       130.16
                  
 
Public Contract Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite    Code Section
20160 et seq. 33.16
22002         33.16
22030 et seq. 33.16
22032         33.16
22034         33.16
22034(f)      33.16
22035         33.16
22036         33.16
22037         33.16
22043 et seq. 33.16
22050         33.16
 
Public Resources Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                                              Code Section
14502                                                   135.02
                                                        122.08,
21000 et seq.                                           122.09,
                                                        153.312
40141                                                   50.01
40181                                                   50.01
40191                                                   50.01
41500                                                   50.01
41802                                                   50.01
Division 30                                             50.01
Division 30, Part 3, Ch. 13.1 (commencing with § 42652)50.01
49300                                                   50.02
                                                        
 
Public Utilities Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite    Code Section
234           152.010
280.5         122.07
1031 - 1036   70.08
5800 et seq.  122.01
5830          122.02
5840(e)(1)(D) 122.03
5840(m)       122.06
5840(n)       122.03
5840(q)       122.04
5860          122.04,
              122.10
5860(d)       122.02
5860(h)       122.04
5860(i)       122.10
5870          122.05
5870(n)       122.05
5900          122.07
7604          93.06
              
 
Regulations Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                           Code Section
Title 14, Ch. 3, 15022(d)            32.52
15162                                32.52
Title 14, § 17402(a)(11.5)          50.01
Title 14, § 17402(a)(26.6)          50.01
Title 14, § 17402.5(b)(4)           50.01
Title 14, § 17409.5.8(c)(2), (3)    50.01
Title 14, § 17855(a)(4)             50.01
Title 14, § 17896.2(a)(4)           50.01
Title 14, § 17896.5                 50.01
Title 14, § 18815.2(a)(13)          50.01
Title 14, § 18815.2(a)(49)          50.01
Title 14, § 18815.2(a)(62)          50.01
Title 14, § 18815.5(d)              50.01
Title 14, § 18815.5(e)              50.01
Title 14, § 18815.5(f)              50.01
Title 14, § 18815.7                 50.01
Title 14, Division 7, Ch. 12         50.01
Title 14, Division 7, Ch. 12, Art. 2 50.01
Title 14, § 18981.2                 50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)                50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(6)             50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(7)             50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(8)             50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(14.5)          50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(18)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(22)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(24)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(25)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(26)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(27)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(30)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(31.5)          50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(33)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(35)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(38)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(39)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(40)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(41)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(42)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(43)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(45)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(46)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(48)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(49)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(51)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(54)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(55)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(60)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(61)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(64)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(65)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(66)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(66)(A)         50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(71)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(73)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(74)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982(a)(76)            50.01
Title 14, § 18982.2(a)(29)          50.01
Title 14, § 18983.1(b)              50.01
Title 14, § 18984.2                 50.12
Title 14, § 18984.2(a)(1)(C)        50.01
Title 14, § 18984.3                 50.12
Title 14, § 18984.8                 50.07
Title 14, § 18984.9(b)              50.07
Title 14, § 18984.9(b)(3)           50.07
Title 14, § 18984.9(c)              50.02,
                                     50.06
Title 14, § 18989.1                 50.11
Title 14, § 18991.3                 50.09
Title 14, § 18991.3(b)              50.09,
                                     50.10
Title 14, § 18991.4                 50.09
Title 14, § 18991.5(a)(1)           50.10
Title 14, § 18991.5(a)(2)           50.10
Title 14, § 18995.4                 50.01
Title 14, § 18996.2                 50.20
Title 19, 2570 et seq.               37.04
Title 23, Division 2, Ch. 2.7     50.01
Title 24, Part 1                     150.01,
                                     150.05
Title 24, Part 2                     150.06,
                                     150.08
Title 24, Part 2, Volume I & II      150.01
                                     150.01,
Title 24, Part 2.5                   150.07,
                                     150.08
Title 24, Part 3                     150.01,
                                     150.10
Title 24, Part 4                     150.01,
                                     150.12
Title 24, Part 5                     150.01,
                                     150.09
Title 24, Part 6                     150.13
Title 24, Part 8                     150.15
Title 24, Part 10                    150.14
Title 24, Part 11                    150.01
66265.51 - 66265.56                  53.12
                                     
 
Revenue and Taxation Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite    Code Section
401           34.29
1211 et seq.  130.16
2188.7        152.010
6001 et seq.  34.27
6067          34.28
6203          34.27
6366          34.29
6366.1        34.29
6702          34.27
6711          34.27
6715          34.27
6737          34.27
6797          34.27
6828          34.27
              34.22,
7200 et seq.  34.27,
              34.29 -
              34.31
7202          34.29
11901 et seq. 34.01,
              34.07
11921 - 11930 34.02
11922         34.03
11923         34.04
11924         34.05
11925         34.06
23701a        112.16
23701b        112.16
23701d        112.16,
              112.41
23701e        112.16
23071f        112.16
23701g        112.16
23701l        112.16
 
Streets and Highway Code
 
State Cite   Code Section
1805         152.026
2100 et seq. 33.01
2113         33.01
 
Vehicle Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite         Code Section
4000 et seq.       71.19
5004               90.11
9105               71.08
9840 et seq.       71.19
21356              78.02
21400              75.01
21401              75.01
22456              128.27
22511.5            71.08
22523              90.03,
                   90.05
22651(k)           90.03,
                   90.05
22660              90.02
22661              90.07
22661(a)           90.12
22661(c)           90.07
22661(f)           90.11
22662              90.10
22663              90.06
22669              90.05,
                   90.12
22710(a)           90.05
22850              90.08
22851.2 - 22851.12 90.09
22852              90.09
39004              72.04
42002              10.99
                   
 
Water Code
 
State Cite    Code Section
13000 et seq. 53.11
13050(d)      53.06
13370 et seq. 53.03
 
Welfare and Institutions Code
 
State Cite   Code Section
742.14       131.14
4500 et seq. 153.003
 
REFERENCES TO 1967 CODE
1967 Code Section 1999 Code Section
1967 Code Section 1999 Code Section
1-4-4             10.23
1-4-5             10.24
1-5-1             31.03
1-5-2             31.03
1-5-3             31.03
1-5-4             31.03
1-5-5             31.03
1-5-6             31.03
1-5-7             31.03
1-6-1             30.01
1-6-2             30.02
1-7-1             31.01
1-7-3             31.02
1-8-1             33.10
1-8-2             33.11
1-8-3             33.12
1-8-4             33.13
1-8-5             33.14
1-8-6             33.16
1-8-7             33.14
1-8-8             33.15
1-8-9             33.17
1-8-10            33.18
1-8-11            33.19
1-9-1             35.01
1-9-2             35.01
1-9-4             35.02
1-9-5             35.03
1-11-1            36.01
1-12-1            36.05
1-12-2            36.05
1-13-1            31.05
1-13-2            31.05
1-13-3            31.05
1-13-4            31.05
1-13-5            31.05
1-14-1            36.02
1-14-2            36.02
1-14-3            36.02
3-7-1             33.01
3-7-2             33.01
3-8-1             34.01
3-8-2             34.02
3-8-3             34.03
3-8-4             34.04
3-8-5             34.05
3-8-6             34.06
3-8-7             34.07
3-8-8             34.08
3-10-1            116.01
3-10-2            116.02
3-10-3            116.04
3-10-4            116.03
3-10-5            116.02
3-10-6            116.05
3-10-7            116.06
3-10-8            116.07
3-10-9            116.07
3-11-1            94.01
3-11-2            94.02
3-11-3            94.03
3-11-4            94.04
3-11-5            94.05
3-11-6            94.06
3-11-7            94.07
3-11-9            94.09
3-11-10           94.10,
                  94.99
3-12-1            95.21
3-12-2            95.21
3-12-3            95.22
3-12-4            95.23
3-12-5            95.24
3-12-6            95.25
3-12-7            95.20
4-1-1             97.20
4-1-2             97.21
4-1-3             97.21
4-1-4             97.22
4-1-6             51.07
4-1-7             51.08
4-1-8             50.05
4-1-9             97.23
4-1-10            97.24
4-1-11            97.25
4-1-12            97.26
4-1-13            97.27
4-1-14            97.28
4-1-15            97.29
4-1-16            97.30
4-1-21            50.05
4-3-1             50.01
4-3-2             50.02
4-3-3             50.03
4-3-4             50.04
4-3-5             50.05
4-3-6             50.06
4-3-7             50.06
4-3-8             50.07
4-3-10            50.14,
                  50.15
4-3-12            50.17
4-3-13            50.18
4-3-14            50.20
4-3-15            50.02
4-4-1             51.01
4-4-3             51.02
4-4-5             51.04
4-4-7             51.05
4-4-8             51.06
4-6-1             52.01
4-6-2             52.02
4-6-3             52.75
4-6-4             52.60
4-6-5             52.30
4-6-6             52.03
4-6-7             52.04
4-6-8             52.05
4-6-9             52.05
4-6-10            52.45
4-6-11            52.46
4-6-12            52.47
4-6-13            52.48
4-6-14            52.48
4-6-15            52.47
4-6-16            52.06
4-6-17            52.07
4-6-18            52.06
4-6-19            52.49
4-6-20            52.08
4-6-21            52.31
4-6-22            52.09
4-6-23            52.11
4-6-24            52.12
4-6-25            52.12
4-6-26            52.12
4-6-28            52.76
4-6-29            52.10
4-6-30            52.77
4-6-31            52.78
4-6-32            52.13
4-6-33            52.79
4-6-34            52.14
4-6-35            52.14
4-6-36            52.33
4-6-37            52.15
4-6-38            52.61
4-6-39            52.62
4-6-40            52.63
4-6-41            52.64
4-6-42            52.64
4-6-43            52.80
4-6-44            52.16
4-6-46            52.81
4-6-47            52.35
4-7-1             97.01
4-7-2             97.02
4-7-3             97.03
4-7-4             97.04
4-7-5             97.05
4-7-6             97.06
4-7-7             97.06
4-7-8             97.06
4-7-9             97.07
4-7-13            97.08
4-8-1             92.50
4-8-2             92.50
4-8-3             92.50
4-8-4             92.50
4-8-5             92.50
5-1-1             150.01
5-2-1             150.02
5-3-1             150.03
5-4-1             150.04
5-5-1             150.05
5-6-1             150.55
5-6-2             150.56
5-6-3             150.57
5-6-4             150.58
5-6-5             150.59
5-10-1            150.07
5-11-1            150.08
5-12-1            150.09
5-13-1            150.10
5-14-1            150.11
5-17-1            150.30
5-17-3            150.32
5-17-4            150.33
5-18-1            150.12
5-19-1            150.13
5-20-1            150.14
6-1-1             110.01
6-1-2             110.02
6-1-3             110.03
6-1-4             110.04
6-1-5             110.05
6-1-6             110.06
6-1-7             110.07
6-1-8             110.08
6-1-9             110.09
6-1-10            110.10
6-1-11            110.11
6-1-12            110.12
6-1-13            110.13
6-1-14            110.14
6-1-15            110.15
6-1-16            110.16
6-1-17            110.17
6-1-18            110.18
6-1-20            110.20
6-1-21            110.21
6-1-22            110.22
6-1-23            110.23
6-1-24            110.24
6-1-25            110.25
6-1-27            110.26
6-2-1             34.20
6-2-2             34.21
6-2-4             34.22
6-2-5             34.23
6-2-6             34.24
6-2-7             34.25
6-2-8             34.26
6-2-9             34.27
6-2-10            34.27
6-2-11            34.28
6-2-12            34.29
6-2-13            34.29
6-2-14            34.29
6-2-15            34.30
6-2-16            34.31
6-2-17            34.32
6-4-1             153.265
6-4-2             153.266
6-4-3             153.267
6-6-1             117.01
6-6-2             117.02
6-6-4             117.03
6-9-1             112.01
6-9-2             112.03
6-9-3             112.15
6-9-4             112.16
6-9-5             112.17
6-9-6             112.18
6-9-7             112.19
6-9-8             112.20
6-9-9             112.21
6-9-10            112.22
6-9-11            112.23
6-9-12            112.23
6-9-13            112.37
6-9-14            112.38
6-9-15            112.39
6-9-16            112.39
6-9-17            112.39
6-9-18            112.39
6-9-19            112.36
6-9-20            112.40
6-9-21            112.41
6-9-22            112.42
6-9-23            112.43
6-9-24            112.35
6-9-25            112.02
6-9-26            112.04
6-10-1            114.01
6-10-2            114.02
6-10-3            114.03
6-10-4            114.04
6-10-5            114.05
6-10-6            114.06
6-10-7            114.07
6-10-8            114.08
6-11-1            111.02
6-11-2            111.02
7-2-3             131.01
7-2-6             130.04
7-3-2             130.01
7-3-4             130.05
7-3-5             130.06
7-3-6             130.07
7-3-7             111.01,
                  130.08
7-3-12            130.99
7-5-1             132.01
7-5-2             132.02
7-5-4             132.03
7-7-1             130.03
7-7-2             130.03
7-7-3             130.03
7-9-1             115.01
7-9-2             115.02
7-9-3             115.06
7-9-4             115.03
7-9-5             115.04
7-9-6             115.05
7-10-1            95.01
7-10-2            95.01
7-10-3            95.01
7-10-4            95.02
7-10-5            95.03
7-13-1            36.03
7-13-2            36.03
7-13-3            36.03
7-17-1            130.15
7-17-2            130.16
7-17-3            130.17
8-1-1             92.10
9-1-1             70.02
9-1-2             70.03
9-1-3             70.04
9-1-4             70.04
9-1-5             70.05
9-1-6             70.06
9-1-7             70.04
9-2-1             71.03
9-2-2             71.04
9-2-3             71.04
9-2-4             71.01
9-2-5             71.05
9-2-6             71.06
9-2-7             71.08
9-2-8             71.07
9-2-9             71.09
9-2-10            71.10
9-2-11            71.09
9-2-12            71.07
9-2-13            71.07
9-2-14            71.11
9-2-15            71.12
9-2-16            71.17
9-2-17            71.13
9-2-18            71.18
9-2-19            71.08
9-2-20            71.02
9-2-21            71.14
9-2-22            71.16
9-2-23            71.15
9-2-24            71.19
9-3-1             72.01
9-3-2             72.02
9-3-3             72.03
9-3-4             72.05
9-3-5             72.06
9-3-6             72.07
9-3-7             72.04
9-3-8             72.99
9-4-1             70.08
9-4-2             Ch. 73, Sch. II
9-4-3             Ch. 73, Sch. II
9-5-1             70.07
10-1-1            153.001
10-1-2            153.002
10-1-3            153.003
10-2-1            153.010
10-2-2            153.011
10-2-3            153.012
10-2-4            153.013
10-2-5            153.014
10-2-6            153.015
10-2-7            153.016
10-3-1            153.030
10-3-2            153.031
10-3-3            153.032
10-3-4            153.033
10-4-1            153.045
10-4-2            153.046
10-4-3            153.047
10-4-4            153.048
10-5-1            153.060
10-5-2            153.061
10-5-3            153.062
10-5-4            153.063
10-7-1            153.075
10-7-2            153.076
10-7-3            153.077
10-7-4            153.078
10-7-5            153.079
10-8-1            153.090
10-8-2            153.091
10-8-3            153.092
10-8-4            153.093
10-8-5            153.094
10-8-6            153.095
10-8A-1           153.105
10-8A-2           153.106
10-8A-3           153.107
10-8A-4           153.108
10-8A-5           153.109
10-9-1            153.120
10-9-2            153.121
10-9-3            153.122
10-9-4            153.123
10-10-1           153.135
10-10-2           153.136
10-10-3           153.137
10-10-4           153.138
10-10-5           153.139
10-11-1           153.150
10-11-2           153.151
10-12-1           153.160
10-12-2           153.161
10-12-3           153.162
10-12-4           153.163
10-12-5           153.164
10-13-1           153.180
10-13-2           153.181
10-13-3           153.182
10-13-4           153.183
10-13-5           153.184
10-14-1           153.195
10-14-2           153.196
10-14-3           153.197
10-14-4           153.198
10-14-5           153.199
10-14-6           153.200
10-14-7           153.201
10-14-8           153.202
10-14-9           153.203
10-15-2           153.216
10-16-1           153.230
10-16-2           153.231
10-16-3           153.232
10-16-4           153.233
10-16-5           153.234
10-16-6           153.235
10-17-1           153.245
10-17-2           153.246
10-17-3           153.247
10-17-4           153.248
10-17-5           153.249
10-17-6           153.250
10-17-7           153.251
10-19-1           153.280
10-19-2           153.281
10-19-3           153.282
10-19-4           153.283
10-19-5           153.284
10-19-7           153.285
10-20-1           153.295
11-1-1            152.003
11-1-2            152.004
11-1-3            152.005
11-1-4            152.006
11-1-5            152.007
11-1-6            152.001
11-1-7            152.008
11-1-8            152.009
11-1-9            152.010
11-1-10           152.011
11-2-1            152.002
11-3-1            152.025
11-3-2            152.026
11-3-3            152.027
11-3-4            152.028
11-3-5            152.029
11-3-6            152.030
11-3-7            152.031
11-3-8            152.032
11-3-9            152.033
11-3-10           152.034
11-3-11           152.035
11-3-12           152.036
11-3-13           152.037
11-3-14           152.038
11-3-15           152.039
11-3-16           152.040
11-3-17           152.041
11-3-19           152.043
11-3-20           152.044
11-4-1            152.055
11-4-2            152.056
11-4-3            152.057
11-4-4            152.058
11-4-5            152.059
11-4-6            152.060
11-5-1            152.070
11-5-2            152.071
11-5-3            152.072
11-5-4            152.073
11-5-5            152.074
11-5-6            152.075
11-5-7            152.076
11-5-8            152.077
11-6-1            152.090
11-6-2            152.091
11-6-3            152.092
11-6-4            152.093
11-6-5            152.094
11-6-6            152.095
11-6-7            152.096
11-6-8            152.097
11-6-9            152.098
11-7-1            152.110
11-7-2            152.111
11-7-3            152.112
11-8-1            152.125
11-8-2            152.126
11-8-3            152.127
11-8-4            152.128
11-9-1            152.140
11-9-2            152.141
11-9-3            152.142
11-9-4            152.143
11-10-1           152.155
11-10-2           152.156
11-10-3           152.157
11-11-1           152.170
11-11-2           152.171
11-11-3           152.172
11-11-4           152.173
11-11-5           152.174
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.      Date Passed Code Section
2             8-1-22      36.01
6             10-2-22     95.02
35½          5-1-31      92.10
                          70.06,
                          71.01,
                          71.03 -
41            5-21-37     71.10,
                          71.12,
                          71.13,
                          71.17
45            3-29-38     31.01
47            12-19-38    51.07
73            8-18-47     131.01
86            3-21-49     132.01,
                          132.03
88            3-21-49     51.02
99            8-13-51     51.08
102           9-11-51     71.08
                          72.01,
108           11-10-52    72.07,
                          72.99
109           12-8-52     130.03
234           9-10-57     70.04
                          33.15,
236           4-28-58     33.17,
                          33.19
239           12-8-58     51.04
245           7-27-59     71.07
246           10-26-59    117.03
287           12-13-65    34.45 -
                          34.58
67-1          1-27-67     34.04
67-8          11-1-67     33.01
67-9          11-27-67    34.08
68-5          10-28-68    31.03
70-1          1-12-70     34.05
70-2          1-26-70     33.17,
                          33.18
70-7          5-25-70     116.07
70-11         8-10-70     95.03
70-13         9-18-70     51.02
70-19         1-25-71     71.07
                          50.01,
71-4          6-28-71     50.04,
                          50.06,
                          50.20
                          50.02,
71-16         11-22-71    50.06,
                          50.07
72-4          4-10-72     35.02
73-10         9-24-73     34.29
                          110.02,
                          110.07,
74-19         9-9-74      110.10,
                          110.17,
                          110.18
74-20         9-9-74      71.12
75-04         6-2-75      50.01,
                          50.02
75-5          7-14-75     51.04
76-4          1-9-76      10.23
76-3          2-9-76      36.03
76-7          6-14-76     71.18
77-5          5-23-77     35.03
77-7          7-25-77     110.18
77-16         8-8-77      30.01
77-15         8-22-77     51.06
77-24         10-25-77    95.03
77-25         10-25-77    71.08
78-4          4-24-78     51.04,
                          51.05
78-11         7-24-78     94.04
78-16         10-9-78     36.03
79-4          5-29-79     71.02
79-9          12-10-79    31.02
80-2          2-11-80     72.03,
                          72.04
80-4          4-14-80     150.55, 150.59
80-11         9-22-80     Ch. 73, Sch. II
80-21         12-8-80     150.10
81-16         8-24-81     110.08
82-5          6-28-82     36.05
82-6          9-13-82     71.14
                          153.016,
                          153.151,
                          153.216,
82-7          9-27-82     153.218,
                          153.232,
                          153.235,
                          153.251
                          52.14,
                          52.15,
83-1          3-28-83     52.33,
                          52.61 -
                          52.64,
                          52.81
                          110.03,
                          110.09,
83-4          5-23-83     110.18,
                          110.26,
                          117.01
83-6          7-25-83     10.24
83-9          8-22-83     153.216,
                          153.233
83-14         1-23-84     34.29
84-01         2-27-84     31.05
84-09         7-23-84     50.05
84-11         9-24-84     132.02
85-01         3-25-85     Repealed Ord. 2022-002
85-02         6-24-85     71.15,
                          71.16
85-03         6-24-85     52.35
85-08         7-22-85     10.24
85-10         9-9-85      130.04
85-15         10-28-85    114.08
85-14         11-12-85    71.07
86-01         1-27-86     30.02
86-06         4-14-86     153.284,
                          153.285
86-11         5-12-86     95.03
86-12         5-12-86     97.02
86-13         5-27-86     95.20
86-19         8-25-86     150.56
87-16         9-14-86     97.04
86-25         10-27-86    94.05
87-04         2-23-87     70.08
                          153.003,
                          153.031,
                          153.033,
                          153.046,
                          153.048,
                          153.061,
                          153.063,
                          153.064,
                          153.077 -
                          153.079,
87-11         7-27-87     153.092 -
                          153.095,
                          153.106 -
                          153.109,
                          153.122 -
                          153.124,
                          153.137,
                          153.139,
                          153.163,
                          153.183,
                          153.184,
                          153.203
87-16         9-14-87     97.08
                          150.02 -
                          150.05,
87-18         10-12-87    150.07 -
                          150.09,
                          150.11 -
                          150.14
87-21         1-11-88     71.11;
                          Ch. 73, Sch. II
88-11         9-26-88     Ch. 73, Sch. II
88-12         10-10-88    10.24
                          153.003,
                          153.031,
                          153.033,
                          153.046,
                          153.048,
                          153.061,
                          153.063,
88-14         11-28-88    153.077,
                          153.092,
                          153.093,
                          153.106,
                          153.107,
                          153.122,
                          153.137,
                          153.183,
                          153.184
89-02         5-22-89     153.122
89-03         6-26-89     153.077,
                          153.093
                          152.002,
                          152.011,
                          152.037,
                          152.044,
                          152.060,
89-09         11-27-89    152.077,
                          152.098,
                          152.112,
                          152.128,
                          152.143,
                          152.157,
                          152.174
                          153.048,
                          153.064,
                          153.079,
                          153.095,
89-22         1-8-90      153.109,
                          153.124,
                          153.139,
                          153.164,
                          153.216
                          150.01,
                          153.003,
                          153.033,
                          153.048,
                          153.063,
                          153.064,
                          153.078,
                          153.079,
90-01         1-22-90     153.094,
                          153.095,
                          153.108,
                          153.109,
                          153.123,
                          153.124,
                          153.139,
                          153.183,
                          153.284,
                          153.285
90-05         4-23-90     152.037
90-13         7-9-90      71.07
91-04         3-11-91     92.50
91-05         4-22-91     50.10
91-07         5-13-91     94.06
91-16         1-13-92     36.02
92-02         3-9-92      115.05
92-05         6-8-92      153.295
                          153.032,
92-06         7-13-92     153.047,
                          153.062
92-07         7-13-92     153.265 -
                          153.267
92-10         9-14-92     71.19
92-11         9-14-92     150.01
92-13         10-12-92    71.12
92-15         10-12-92    130.15 -
                          130.17
92-17         12-14-92    153.184
92-20         12-14-92    110.18
                          112.01 -
                          112.04,
93-03         9-13-93     112.15 -
                          112.23,
                          112.35 -
                          112.43
93-06         11-22-93    52.64
93-07         11-22-93    152.060
                          113.001,
                          113.002,
                          113.015 -
                          113.020,
                          113.030 -
                          113.035,
                          113.045 -
                          113.051,
                          113.065 -
94-09         9-12-94     113.068,
                          113.080 -
                          113.089,
                          113.100,
                          113.101,
                          113.115 -
                          113.122,
                          113.135 -
                          113.143,
                          113.155 -
                          113.158
95-02         2-27-95     131.10 -
                          131.14
95-04         4-10-95     93.01 -
                          93.10
                          51.20 -
95-05         4-10-95     51.33,
                          53.15 -
                          53.18
95-06         4-24-95     153.305 -
                          153.314
95-12         11-13-95    50.13
96-03         3-25-96     150.01
96-04         4-8-96      Repealed by Ord. 2018-007
96-05         6-10-96     94.06
97-01         1-27-97     36.04
                          153.032,
97-03         1-27-97     153.047,
                          153.062 (153.325 repealed by Ord. 2021-007)
97-06         4-28-97     35.04
97-09         1-12-98     51.03
                          117.02,
98-02         7-13-98     153.076,
                          153.077
98-03         7-13-98     153.092,
                          153.093
98-04         7-13-98     153.160 -
                          153.164
98-06         11-23-98    94.03
98-07         1-11-99     Ch. 73, Sch. II
99-01         2-8-99      152.004,
                          152.010
                          94.07,
                          94.09,
                          94.10,
99-02         3-8-99      94.99,
                          130.05 -
                          130.08,
                          130.99
99-05         5-10-99     90.01 -
                          90.15
99-06         6-28-99     152.037
99-07         6-28-99     153.335 -
                          153.344
99-09         6-28-99     Adopting Ordinance
99-12         12-13-99    132.02
2000-01       2-14-00     150.05
                          150.01 -
2000-02       2-14-00     150.04,
                          150.07 -
                          150.14
2000-03       4-24-00     153.280,
                          153.281
2000-04       4-10-00     52.65
2000-05       4-24-00     153.184
2000-06       5-8-00      51.01,
                          51.03
                          118.01 -
2000-07       6-26-00     118.27,
                          154.01 -
                          154.03
2000-08       9-11-00     131.12
2000-09       12-11-00    52.01,
                          52.17
2001-02       3-26-01     35.04
2001-05       7-9-01      99.01 -
                          99.19
2001-06       7-9-01      51.01,
                          51.03
2001-07       7-23-01     153.285
2001-08       10-8-01     50.10
2001-09       9-24-01     152.113,
                          152.114
                          153.031,
2002-001      1-28-02     153.046,
                          153.061
                          33.16 -
2002-002      1-28-02     33.18,
                          33.20
2002-004      6-10-02     74.01
                          133.01 -
2002-005      6-10-02     133.04,
                          133.99
2002-006      8-26-02     153.184
2003-002      2-24-03     50.09
Res. 2003-019 2-24-03     153.184
2003-004      4-14-03     94.11
2003-005      5-27-03     50.06
2003-006      6-9-03      50.10
2003-007      6-9-03      51.01,
                          51.03
                          153.031,
                          153.032,
2003-014      11-10-03    153.047,
                          153.061,
                          153.062 (153.325 repealed by Ord. 2021-007)
2003-015      11-24-03    94.07
2003-016      12-8-03     71.12
2003-017      12-8-03     71.16
2004-001      6-14-04     153.01,
                          153.033
2004-004      6-28-04     51.01,
                          51.03
2004-006      8-23-04     155.01 -
                          155.11
2004-007      9-27-04     51.01,
                          51.03
2004-009      10-25-04    95.01
2004-11       12-13-04    30.02
2005-002      1-24-05     Ch. 73, Sch. II
2005-003      2-14-05     71.16
2005-004      4-25-05     51.03
2005-005      4-25-05     52.61,
                          52.65
2005-007      5-9-05      51.03
2005-008      4-25-05     52.61
2005-009      6-13-05     153.360 -
                          153.374
2005-011      6-27-05     94.04,
                          94.12
2005-012      7-11-05     52.61,
                          52.64
2005-013      7-11-05     51.01,
                          51.03
2005-015      10-24-05    50.10
2005-017      11-14-05    50.10
2006-002      3-13-06     53.01 -
                          53.23
                          119.01 -
                          119.03,
                          119.09,
2006-003      3-13-06     119.11 -
                          119.16,
                          119.18,
                          119.21 -
                          119.24
2006-005      3-27-06     34.21
2006-006      4-10-06     33.16
                          156.01,
                          156.02,
                          156.10 -
                          156.18,
2006-009      5-8-06      156.25 -
                          156.31,
                          156.40 -
                          156.50,
                          156.99
2006-010      7-10-06     52.61
2006-011      7-10-06     51.01,
                          51.03
2006-012      10-23-06    50.07,
                          50.10
2006-013      11-27-06    36.03
2007-003      7-9-07      52.61
2007-004      7-9-07      51.01,
                          51.03
                          134.01 -
2007-006      9-10-07     134.11,
                          134.99
                          135.01 -
2007-008      12-10-07    135.09,
                          135.99
                          95.35 -
2008-002      3-10-08     95.55,
                          95.99
2008-003      3-10-08     131.14 -
                          131.18
                          119.01 -
2008-004      3-10-08     119.03,
                          119.06 -
                          119.24
2008-006      7-14-08     51.01,
                          51.03
2008-007      7-14-08     52.61
2008-008      9-8-08      153.031,
                          153.032
                          10.01 -
                          10.24,
2008-009      10-13-08    10.30 -
                          10.32,
                          10.99
2008-010      10-13-08    30.01,
                          30.02
                          31.01 -
2008-011      10-13-08    31.03,
                          31.05
2008-012      10-13-08    33.17,
                          33.18
2008-014      10-13-08    36.01,
                          36.02
2008-015      10-27-08    121.01 -
                          121.21
2008-016      1-12-09     98.01 -
                          98.24
                          122.01 -
                          122.03,
2008-017      12-22-08    122.05,
                          122.07,
                          122.08
                          70.01 -
                          70.08,
                          75.01 -
2009-001      5-26-09     75.04,
                          76.01,
                          77.01,
                          78.01,
                          78.02
2009-002      6-22-09     153.285
2009-003      7-13-09     51.40 -
                          51.46
2009-004      7-13-09     51.03,
                          51.06
2009-007      9-14-09     36.04
2009-008      9-14-09     111.01,
                          111.02
2009-009      10-12-09    94.07
2009-010      12-14-09    51.03
2010-001      6-28-10     52.61
2011-002      2-28-11     35.04
2011-003      6-27-11     94.10,
                          94.99
2012-001      4-23-12     110.08
2013-001      4-22-13     51.01,
                          51.09
                          151.01 -
                          151.11,
                          151.20 -
2013-002      8-12-13     151.23,
                          151.30 -
                          151.35,
                          151.45 -
                          151.47
2014-004      5-27-14     153.004
                          157.02 -
2014-005      6-10-14     157.05 (
                          157.01 repealed by Ord. 2020-003)
                          153.010,
2014-006      7-8-14      153.011,
                          153.066 -
                          153.072
2014-007      9-23-14     50.10
2014-014      12-9-14     124.01 -
                          124.03
2014-015      12-9-14     95.46
                          125.01 -
                          125.07,
2015-001      2-24-15     153.076,
                          153.092,
                          153.106
                          153.003,
                          153.061,
2015-002      2-24-15     153.077,
                          153.093,
                          153.107
2015-003      2-24-15     153.185
2015-004      2-24-15     153.221 -
                          153.228
2015-005      3-10-15     110.08,
                          110.18
                          153.003,
2015-009      4-14-15     153.077,
                          153.093,
                          153.107
                          91.01 -
                          91.06,
                          94.01 -
2015-011      6-23-15     94.03,
                          94.07 -
                          94.14,
                          94.99
2015-012      6-23-15     53.01 -
                          53.23
2015-013      8-11-15     37.01 -
                          37.13
2015-014      10-13-15    51.03
2015-015      10-13-15    52.61
2015-016      10-27-15    150.30 -
                          150.38
2015-018      11-24-15    123.01 -
                          123.15
2015-019      12-8-15     30.03
2016-003      4-26-16     153.218,
                          153.219
                          52.01,
2016-004      3-8-16      52.32,
                          52.34,
                          52.61
                          151.01 -
                          151.11,
                          151.20 -
                          151.23,
                          151.30 -
2016-006      9-13-16     151.35,
                          151.45 -
                          151.48,
                          152.012,
                          153.380 -
                          153.382
2016-007      11-8-16     Ch. 73, Sch. I
2017-001      1-10-17     31.03 -
                          31.05
2017-002      1-10-17     Repealed by Ord. 2020-003
                          92.50,  
2017-004      2-28-17     94.07,
                          94.11
2017-005      4-11-17     96.01 -
                          96.19
                          110.19,
                          120.01 -
                          120.03,
                          120.10 -
                          120.15,
2017-007      8-22-17     120.20,
                          120.30,
                          120.40,
                          120.50,
                          120.60 (120.61 repealed by Ord. 2020-009; 120.62
                          repealed by Ord. 2024-003)
2017-008      9-26-17     150.17
                          32.01 -
                          32.08,
                          32.20 -
2017-009      9-26-17     32.23,
                          32.30 -
                          32.35,
                          32.45 -
                          32.55
                          153.003,
                          153.030 -
                          153.033,
2017-010      10-24-17    153.045 -
                          153.048,
                          153.060 -
                          153.064,
                          153.184 (153.325 repealed by Ord. 2021-007)
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Action and Disposition
Ord. No. Date Passed Action and Disposition
2018-001 1-9-18      Development Agreement No. 01-2017 (Not codified)
2018-002 1-9-18      Zoning amendment (Not codified)
2018-003 1-23-18     Development agreement, Riverbank Cannabis Collective (Not
                     codified)
                     Video service franchise (
2018-004 3-27-18     122.01 -
                     122.10)
2018-005 8-28-18     Building requirements (
                     153.033)
2018-006 9-11-18     Signage (Not codified)
                     Fire protection and prevention (
                     92.01,
                     92.10,
2018-007 12-11-18    92.20 -
                     92.33,
                     92.40 -
                     92.44,
                     92.50)
                     Cannabis business tax (
2018-008 12-11-18    34.70,
                     34.71)
2019-002 1-22-19     Dangerous trees, mistletoe (
                     96.20)
                     Sidewalks vending (
2019-006 10-22-19    126.01 -
                     126.10,
                     126.99)
                     Underage cannabis use (
2019-008 12-10-19    134.01 -
                     134.11,
                     134.99)
                     Signs (
2020-001 1-28-20     153.280 -
                     153-285)
                     Hemp cultivation (
2020-002 2-11-20     127.01,
                     127.05)
                     Adoption of standard codes (
2020-003 2-11-20     150.01 -
                     150.16); purpose and intent (
                     157.01)
2020-004 4-14-20     Development agreement for the River Run Subdivision
                     Residential Project (Not codified)
                     Fireworks sales and discharge (
2020-005 4-14-20     92.28); fireworks regulations and enforcement (
                     92.43,
                     92.44)
2020-006 4-14-20     Shelter at their place of residence (Not codified)
                     Development agreement for the extension and approval of
2020-007 4-28-20     the Diamond Bar East Subdivision tentative map and revised
                     map (Not codified)
2020-008 7-28-20     Development agreement with Canna Mart, LLC (Not codified)
2020-009 7-28-20     Cannabis regulations (
                     120.61)
2020-010 7-16-20     Requiring the wearing of a face mask or covering that
                     covers the nose and mouth (Not codified)
2020-011 10-13-20    Development agreement with DT California, LLC (Not
                     codified)
                     Development agreement for the Ward Villas Affordable
2020-012 10-13-20    Housing Project to extend the life of the approved Ward
                     Villas tentative map (Not codified)
2021-001 4-27-21     Development agreement amendment with E & J Distributors,
                     LLC (Not codified)
2021-002 5-11-21     Development agreement amendment with Pacafi Cooperative,
                     Inc. (Not codified)
2021-003 8-24-21     Development agreement amendment with MWG Holdings Group,
                     Inc. (Not codified)
                     Mobile food vending program (
                     128.01 -
                     128.14,
2021-004 8-24-21     128.25 -
                     128.28,
                     128.40 -
                     128.47,
                     128.99)
2021-005 9-28-21     Zoning amendment (Not codified)
2021-006 9-28-21     Zoning amendment (Not codified)
                     Zoning definitions and accessory dwelling unit provisions
                     (
2021-007 12-14-21    153.003,
                     153.325 -
                     153.330)
                     Garbage (
                     50.01 -
2022-001 4-12-22     50.15,
                     50.17 -
                     50.20)
                     Zoning administrative procedures (
2022-002 4-26-22     153.210 -
                     153.219)
                     Garbage (
                     50.15,
                     50.16,
2022-005 9-27-22     51.02,
                     51.03,
                     52.64 -
                     52.66)
                     Adoption of standard codes (
2023-001 1-24-23     150.01 -
                     150.16); purpose and intent (
                     157.01)
                     Zoning definitions and tiny house villages provisions (
                     153.003,
                     153.031,
2023-003 1-24-23     153.046,
                     153.061,
                     153.067,
                     153.170 -
                     153.177)
                     Vacant buildings (
2023-004 5-23-23     150.70 -
                     150.84)
2023-005 12-12-23    Rezoning (Not codified)
2024-001 1-9-24      Prohibited and limited parking (
                     71.07)
2024-002 1-23-24     Compensation (
                     30.02)
                     Cannabis; appeals and enforcement (
2024-003 8-27-24     120.60,
                     120.62,
                     120.63)
                     Massage/bodywork establishments (
                     119.01 -
                     119.05,
                     119.07 -
2024-004 8-27-24     119.11,
                     119.14,
                     119.17 -
                     119.19,
                     119.22,
                     119.23)
2024-005 10-22-24    Zoning amendment (Not codified)
                    
Comprehensive Ordinance List
Publisher's Note: The following table lists all ordinances passed by the City
of Riverbank beginning in 2018. The table includes links to the ordinances (as
maintained in PDF format) and to the code sections affected (where applicable).
For other legislation, including ordinances passed prior to 2018, please
contact the City of Riverbank.
 
Ordinances that amend the Code of Ordinances and are not yet codified have
their identifiying information highlighted in yellow. Changes made by those
ordinances are not incorporated into the text of the Code until the amending
ordinances are codified. Ordinances that do not affect the code have been
grayed out.
 
Jump to:
2018 Ordinances
2019 Ordinances
2020 Ordinances
2021 Ordinances
2022 Ordinances
2023 Ordinances
2024 Ordinances
2025 Ordinances
2026 Ordinances
2018 Ordinances
Ordinance No. Adopted Code Section or Subject
Ordinance Adopted Code Section or Subject
No.
2017-011  12-12-  Approving the rezoning of 2.4 acres located at 2644 Morrill Road to Multiple
          17      Family Residential (R-3) Zone.
2018-001  1-9-18  Approving development agreement No. 01-2017 by and between the City of
                  Riverbank and Pacafi Cooperative Inc.
2018-002  1-9-18  Approving rezoning of 9.1 acres to planned development located at 6272 Central
                  Avenue - A project known as River Run.
2018-003  1-23-18 Approving a development agreement by and between the City of Riverbank and
                  Family and Friends Association, Inc. for a cannabis dispensary.
                  Repealing in its entirety Ch. 122: Video Franchise, and replacing with a new
                  Ch. 122: Video Service Franchise, to include reauthorization of the PEG fee
                  and to automatically reauthorize the PEG fee upon renewal of a state video
2018-004  3-27-18 franchise.
                   
                  Sections Affected:
                  Chapter 122
                  Amending § 153.033 by repealing this section in its entirety and substituting
                  it with a new § 153.033, Building Requirements, Single-Family Residential
2018-005  8-28-18 District R-1 Zone.
                   
                  Sections Affected:
                  153.033
                  Amending the Downtown Specific Plan: Section 2.3.4 Signage, by repealing this
2018-006  9-11-18 section in its entirety and substituting it with a new Section 2.3.4 Signage
                  to the Downtown Specific Plan.
                  Amending Ch. 92: Fire Protection and Prevention, by repealing this chapter in
          12-11-  its entirety and replacing with a new Ch. 92: Fire Protection and Prevention.
2018-007  18       
                  Sections Affected:
                  Chapter 92
                  Amending Ch. 34: Taxation of Title III: Administration, by adding subchapter
                  Cannabis Business Tax, §§ 34.70 through 34.71, Imposing a business license tax
          12-11-  at a rate of up to ten percent (10%) on the gross receipts of commercial
2018-008  18      cannabis businesses in the City.
                   
                  Sections Affected:
                  34.70, 34.71
 
 
 
2019 Ordinances
Ordinance No. Adopted Code Section or Subject
Ordinance Adopted Code Section or Subject
No.
2019-001  1-22-19 Approving a rezone of 1.1 acres to planned development, located at Seventh
                  and Sierra Streets - A project known as Riverbank Commons.
                  Amending Ch. 96: Trees, by adding a new §96.20: Dangerous Trees, Mistletoe a
                  Nuisance.
2019-002  1-22-19  
                  Sections Affected:
                  96.20
2019-003  3-26-19 Approving pre-zoning of the crossroads west specific plan
2019-004  3-26-19 Approving a development agreement by and between the City of Fairbank and
                  Western Pacific Holdings, Inc.
2019-005  5-28-19 Approving a development agreement by and between the City of Riverbank and
                  E&J Distributors, LLC.
                  Adding a new Ch. 126: Sidewalk Vending.
2019-006  10-22-   
          19      Sections Affected:
                  126.01 - 126.10, 126.99
2019-007  11-12-  Approving a development agreement by and between the City of Riverbank and
          19      the Machado Parties and the Harrigfeld Parties.
                  Amending Ch. 134: Prohibition Against Underage Drinking and Cannabis Use and
          12-10-  Social Host Liability.
2019-008  19       
                  Sections Affected:
                  134.01 - 134.11, 134.99
 
 
2020 Ordinances
Ordinance No. Adopted Code Section or Subject
Ordinance Adopted Code Section or Subject
No.
                  Amending Ch. 153: Zoning, by repealing in their entirety §153.280 through
                  §153.285 and replacing with new sections.
2020-001  1-28-20  
                  Sections Affected:
                  153.280 - 153.285
                  Amending Ch. 126: Hemp Cultivation.
2020-002  1-28-20  
                  Sections Affected:
                  127.01, 127.05
                  Amending Title XV: Land Usage.
2020-003  2-11-20  
                  Sections Affected:
                  150.01 - 150.16; 157.01
2020-004  4-14-20 Approving development agreement No. 02-2019.
                  Amending Ch. 92: Fire Protection and Prevention.
2020-005  4-14-20  
                  Sections Affected:
                  92.28, 92.43, 92.44
2020-006  4-14-20 Declaring a shelter in place order.
2020-007  4-28-20 Approving development agreement No. 01-2020.
2020-008  7-28-20 Approving a development agreement between the City of Riverbank and Canna
                  Mart, LLC.
                  Amending Ch. 120: Cannabis Regulations.
2020-009  7-28-20  
                  Sections Affected:
                  120.61
2020-010  7-16-20 Declaring a mask requirement for businesses.
2020-011  10-13-  Approving development agreement No. 03-2019.
          20
2020-012  10-13-  Approving development agreement No. 02-2020.
          20
 
 
 
2021 Ordinances
Ordinance No. Adopted Code Section or Subject
Ordinance Adopted Code Section or Subject
No.
2021-001  4-27-21 Approving a development agreement amendment with E&J Distributors LLC.
2021-002  5-11-21 Approving a development agreement amendment with PACAFI Cooperative Inc.
2021-003  8-24-21 Approving a development agreement amendment with MWG Holdings Group Inc.
                  Adding a new Ch. 127: Mobile Food Vending Program.
2021-004  8-24-21  
                  Sections Affected:
                  128.01 - 128.14, 128.25 - 128.28, 128.40 - 128.47, 128.99
2021-005  9-28-21 Approving the rezone of 4.56 acres to planned development located at 4131
                  Kentucky Ave.
2021-006  9-28-21 Approving the rezone of 5.9 acres to planned development located at 6448 Claus
                  Rd.
                  Repealing and replacing §§ 153.003 and 153.325. Adding new §§ 153.326 through
          12-14-  153.330.
2021-007  21       
                  Sections Affected:
                  153.003, 153.325 - 153.330
 
 
 
2022 Ordinances
 
Ordinance No. Adopted Code Section or Subject
                      Amending Ch. 50, Garbage, regarding the disposal of
                      recyclable and organic materials.
2022-001      4-12-22  
                      Sections Affected:
                      50.01 - 50.20
                      Amending Ch. 153, Zoning, regarding permits.
2022-002      4-26-22  
                      Sections Affected:
                      153.210 - 153.219
                      Amending sewer rates and payments.
2022-005      9-27-22  
                      Sections Affected:
                      §§ 50.10, 50.11, 51.02, 51.03, 52.64, 52.65, and 52.66
 
 
2023 Ordinances
 
Ordinance No. Adopted    Code Section or Subject
                         Adopting 2022 Edition of the California
                         Administrative, Building, Residential, Green Building
                         Standards, Plumbing, Electrical, Fire, Mechanical,
                         Energy, Existing Building, Historical, and Solar/
2023-001      1-24-2023  Photovoltaic Power Systems. Amending water efficient
                         landscape and irrigation.
                          
                         Sections Affected:
                         Chapter 150; 157.01
                         Tiny House Villages
                          
2023-003      1-24-2023  Sections Affected:
                         153.003, 153.031, 153.046, 153.061, 153.067; Adding
                         153.170 - 153.177
                         Adding new sections 150.80 through 150.100 to Ch. 150
                         regarding vacant buildings.
2023-004      5-23-2023   
                         Sections Affected:
                         Adding 150.70 - 150.84
2023-005      11-14-2023 Approving rezoning of 8.55 acres to planned
                         development
 
 
2024 Ordinances
 
 
Ordinance Adopted Code Section or Subject
No.
                  Amending Ch 71: Stopping, Standing, and Parking regarding prohibited and
          1-9-    limited parking
2024-001  2024     
                  Sections Affected:
                  71.07
                  Amending Ch. 30 regardin compensation of Councilmembers
2024-002  1-23-    
          2024    Sections Affected:
                  30.02
                  Amending permit appeals procedure, administrative penalty appeals procedure,
                  and cost recovery.
2024-003  8/27/24  
                  Sections Affected:
                  120.60, 120.62
                  Amending §119.01 through §119.23 regarding massage/bodywork establishments.
2024-004  8/27/24  
                  Sections Affected:
                  119.01, 119.23
2024-005  10/22/  Ordinance Approving the Rezoning of 5.9± Acres to Planned Development (Pd),
          24      Located at 6448 Claus Road (Apn: 062-039-048)
                 
 
2025 Ordinances
 
 
2026 Ordinances
 
Ordinance No. Adopted Code Section or Subject
                      Amending Ch. 150: Building Regulations adopting 2025
                      California Building Standards Code; Amending Ch. 157:
2026-001      1/27/26 Water Efficient Landscape and Irrigation
                       
                      Sections Affected:
                      150.01 - 150.16; 157.01
                     
                     
                     
 
 
