SAN BERNARDINO, CALIFORNIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. MC-1657, passed 12-17-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. MC-1653
AN ORDINANCE OF THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN BERNARDINO,
CALIFORNIA, ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING,
CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING
WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the City San Bernardino, California ("City") is a chartered city
and municipal corporation, duly organized under the California Constitution and
laws of the State of California; and
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City are
inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and substance
for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general
welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the City Council of the City has authorized a general compilation,
revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of a general and
permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, Government Code Sections 50022.1 through 50022.10 provide for the
codification, compilation, recodification, and publication of the permanent and
general ordinances of the City.
   THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN BERNARDINO DO ORDAIN AS
FOLLOWS:
   SECTION 1. The above recitals are true and correct and are incorporated
herein by this reference.
   SECTION 2. Recodification and Adoption. There is hereby codified and adopted
the City of San Bernardino Municipal Code as revised, reformatted, indexed,
codified, compiled, edited, updated, together with those secondary codes
adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save
and except those portions of the secondary code as are deleted, modified, or
amended by the provisions of the City of San Bernardino Municipal Code. The
City of San Bernardino Municipal Code and the secondary codes adopted by
reference in the City of San Bernardino Municipal Code are adopted by reference
under the provisions of Government Code §§ 50022.1 to 50022.10. The general
ordinances of the City as revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in
book form are hereby adopted as and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of
the City of San Bernardino."
   SECTION 3. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 2 shall consist of
the following Titles:
   TITLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
                  1.01.   Code Adoption
                  1.04.   General Provisions
                  1.08.   Resolutions and Ordinances
                  1.12.   General Penalty
                  1.16.   Boundaries of Wards
                  1.20.   Working of Probationers on Public Property
                  1.24.   Designation of Old City
                  1.26.   Time Limitations for Administrative Mandamus
Proceedings
                  1.28.   Reserved
   TITLE 2: ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
                  2.01.   Mayor Pro Tempore
                  2.02.   City Manager
                  2.03.   Vacancies
                  2.04.   Personnel System
                  2.06.   Purchasing Agent
                  2.08.   City Treasurer
                  2.10.   Department of Finance and Management Services
                  2.12.   Fire Department
                  2.14.   Department of Public Works
                  2.15.   Department of Community Development and Housing
                  2.16.   Development Services Department
                  2.17.   Boards, Bureaus and Commissions - General
                  2.18.   Parks, Recreation and Community Services Department
                  2.19.   Elected Official Compensation Advisory Commission
                  2.20.   Special Counsel Services
                  2.22.   Planning Commission
                  2.23.   Historical Preservation Commission
                  2.24.   Central City Parking Place Commission
                  2.26.   Animal Control Commission
                  2.27.   Library Board
                  2.28.   Board of Water Commissioners
                  2.30.   Fine Arts Commission
                  2.31.   Relocation Appeals Board
                  2.32.   Board of Fire Commissioners
                  2.34.   Board of Police Commissioners
                  2.36.   Peace Officer Standards and Training
                  2.38.   Police Reserve
                  2.39.   Human Relations Commission
                  2.40.   Community Development Commission
                  2.41.   Main Street Advisory Board
                  2.42.   Community Television Commission
                  2.43.   Bureau of Franchises
                  2.44.   Cemetery Commission
                  2.45.   Building Appeals Board
                  2.46.   Disaster Council
                  2.47.   Central City Advisory Board
                  2.48.   State Employees’ Retirement System
                  2.49.   Senior Affairs Commission
                  2.50.   Personnel Commission
                  2.52.   City Hall
                  2.54.   Holidays
                  2.55.   Local Campaign Finance Regulations
                  2.56.   Elections
                  2.57.   Online or Electronic Filing of Fair Political
Practices Commission Forms
                  2.58.   Meetings
                  2.60.   Disclosure of Financial Interests
                  2.62.   Filing of Official Bonds
                  2.64.   Appeals to City Council
                  2.65.   Sale of Real Property
                  2.66.   Contract of Indemnity
                  2.68.   Vacancies in Office
                  2.70.   Sale of Unclaimed Property
                  2.72.   Demands Against City; Payment
                  2.73.   Collection of Debts
                  2.74.   Financial Interests of Appointed City Committee
Members
                  2.75.   Use of City’s CATV Facilities
                  2.76.   Council Committees
                  2.77.   Facilities Management Department
                  2.78.   Code Compliance Department
                  2.79.   Information Technology Department
                  2.80.   Animal Control Department
                  2.81.   Police Department
                  2.82.   Mayor and City Council Compensation
                  2.83.   Department of Economic Development
   TITLE 3: REVENUE AND FINANCE
                  3.04.   Purchasing System
                  3.05.   Budget Transfers
                  3.08.   Warrants
                  3.10.   Checks Returned for Insufficient Funds
                  3.12.   Refund of Fees for Permits, Licenses and Certificates
                  3.13.   Waiver or Refund of Fees for Charitable Organizations
                  3.16.   Claims Against the City
                  3.20.   Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund
                  3.24.   Traffic Safety Fund
                  3.26.   Traffic Systems Fee
                  3.27.   Development Impact Fees
                  3.28.   Special Public Health Fund
                  3.32.   Public Park Development and Recreation Fund
                  3.36.   Cemetery Fund
                  3.38.   Planned Local Drainage Facilities Fund
                  3.40.   Property Taxes
                  3.44.   Service Users Tax
                  3.46.   Service Users Tax Reduction and Modernization Act
                  3.48.   Real Property Transfer Tax
                  3.52.   Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax
                  3.54.   Reserved
                  3.55.   Transient Lodging Tax
                  3.56.   Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax
                  3.57.   Transactions and Use Tax
                  3.60.   Cigarette Tax
                  3.64.   Tax on Parking and Business Improvement Area
                  3.68.   Assessment for Nuisance Abatement
                  3.70.   Fees Set by Resolution
                  3.72.   User Fees for Emergency Medical Services
                  3.73.   User Fees for Video Production Services
                  3.75.   Drainage Facilities; Public Utilities
                  3.80.   Cost Recovery System for Booking Fee Collections
   TITLE 4: RESERVED
[Reserved]
   TITLE 5: BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND REGULATIONS
Article I. General Provisions
                  5.04.   General Provisions and Rates
                  5.05.   Medical Marijuana Dispensaries
                  5.08.   Reserved
                  5.10.   Commercial Cannabis Activities
                  5.12.   Reserved
                  5.14.   Entertainment - Dances and Adult Entertainment
                  5.16.   Fire, Removal or Closing-Out Sales
                  5.18.   Cannabis Business Tax
                  5.19.   Peddling and Soliciting
                  5.20.   Massage Parlors - Massagists
                  5.22.   Outdoor Sales and Displays
                  5.24.   Transporting Persons for Hire
                  5.26.   Shopping Carts
Article II. Specific Businesses
                  5.28.   Automobile Wreckers
                  5.30.   Sidewalk Vending
                  5.32.   Billiard Rooms and Poolrooms
                  5.36.   Bingo Games
                  5.40.   Charitable and Religious Solicitations in Central
City Mall
                  5.42.   Outdoor Entertainment
                  5.44.   Coin-Operated Game Machines
                  5.48.   Reserved
                  5.52.   Escort Bureaus
                  5.56.   Junk and Secondhand Dealers
                  5.60.   Motor Buses
                  5.64.   Motor Fuel Sales
                  5.68.   Personal Property Sales
                  5.72.   Satellite Horse Race Wagering
                  5.76.   Taxicabs and Non-Emergency Medical Vehicles
                  5.80.   Theaters - Motion Picture and Electrical Equipment
                  5.82.   Operator Permit Regulations
                  5.84.   Enforcement - Citing Authority
   TITLE 6: ANIMALS
                  6.01.   General Provisions
                  6.02.   Noisy Animals
                  6.03.   Keeping of Non-Equine Livestock
                  6.04.   Horses
                  6.05.   Fowl
                  6.06.   Pigeons
                  6.07.   Wild, Exotic, Dangerous or Non-Domestic Animals in
Captivity
                  6.08.   Dogs
                  6.09.   Vicious and Potentially Dangerous Dogs
                  6.10.   Cats
                  6.11.   Quarantine
                  6.12.   Police Dogs
                  6.13.   Enforcement - Penalty
                  6.14.   Administrative Citations
   TITLE 7: RESERVED
[Reserved]
   TITLE 8: HEALTH AND SAFETY
                  8.01.   Environmental Health Code (“EHC”)
                  8.02.   Inspection Grading of Food Establishments
                  8.03.   Apiaries
                  8.05.   Collection of Rent for Buildings Ordered Vacated
                  8.06.   Distribution of Medicine, Pills or Drugs
                  8.07.   Reserved
                  8.09.   Treatment of Wounded Persons
                  8.12.   Reserved
                  8.14.   Yard Sales
                  8.15.   Litter
                  8.18.   Accumulation of Combustible and Non- Combustible
Materials
                  8.19.   Abatement of Fire Hazards and Hazardous Trees
                  8.21.   Reserved
                  8.24.   Solid Waste Collection, Removal, Disposal, Processing
and Recycling
                  8.24.5.   Construction and Demolition Waste Recycling Program
                  8.25.   Scrap Tires
                  8.27.   Nuisances
                  8.30.   Public Nuisances
                  8.33.   Reserved
                  8.35.   Reserved
                  8.36.   Abandoned Vehicles
                  8.38.   Signs on Vacant Properties
                  8.39.   Seizure and Forfeiture of Nuisance Vehicles
                  8.42.   Reserved
                  8.45.   Reserved
                  8.48.   Hotels and Lodging Houses
                  8.50.   Venereal Diseases
                  8.51.   Mufflers
                  8.54.   Noise Control
                  8.57.   Sound Vehicles
                  8.60.   Fireworks
                  8.61.   Prohibited Fireworks
   TITLE 9: PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Article I. Offenses Against Public Officers and Government
                  9.04.   Improper Use of City Insignia
                  9.08.   Soliciting Tort Claims
                  9.12.   Disturbing City Business
                  9.16.   False Reports
Article II. Offenses Against the Person
                  9.20.   Leg-Hold Traps
Article III. Offenses Against Public Decency
                  9.28.   Offenses Against Public Decency
                  9.32.   Public Consumption of Alcohol
                  9.36.   Reserved
                  9.40.   Reserved
                  9.44.   Games of Chance
Article IV. Offenses Against Public Peace
                  9.48.   Sound-Making or Sound-Amplifying Devices
                  9.49.   Recreational Activities - Shopping Centers
Article V. Offenses Against Property
                  9.52.   Trespass
                  9.56.   Motor Vehicle Trespass
                  9.58.   Private Surveillance Equipment
Article VI. Consumer Protection
                  9.60.   Prohibition Against Certain Forms of Aggressive
Solicitation
                  9.62.   Median Island Safety
                  9.64.   Fake Sales
Article VII. Offenses By or Against Minors
                  9.68.   Curfew - Minors
                  9.69.   Daytime Loitering
                  9.70.   Protection of Minors
Article VIII. Weapons
                  9.80.   Concealed Weapons
                  9.84.   Projectiles
                  9.90.   Authority to Arrest - Citations
                  9.92.   Administrative Citation Process
                  9.93.   Administrative Civil Penalties
                  9.94.   Administrative Hearings and Appeals
Article IX. Narcotics and Gangs
                  9.95.   Narcotics and Gang-Related Crime Eviction Program
                  9.96.   Crime-Free Zones
                  9.97.   Regulation of Registered Sex Offenders
                  9.98.   Psychoactive Bath Salts, Psychoactive Herbal Incense
and Other Synthetic
                     Drugs
   TITLE 10: VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Article I. General Regulations
                  10.04.   Definitions
                  10.08.   Obedience to Traffic Regulations
                  10.12.   Traffic-Control Devices
                  10.16.   Stopping, Standing and Parking
                  10.20.   Special Stops
                  10.24.   Operation of Vehicles and Bicycles
                  10.25.   Vehicles for Sale on Public Streets
                  10.28.   Pedestrians
                  10.32.   Buses and Railroad Trains
                  10.36.   Loading Zones, Bus Stops and Crosswalks
                  10.38.   Drive-In Establishments
                  10.40.   Damage to Property
                  10.44.   Violation - Penalty
Article II. Specific Regulations
                  10.48.   Bicycles
                  10.52.   Speed Limits
                  10.56.   Noise Limits
   TITLE 11: RESERVED
[Reserved]
   TITLE 12: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
                  12.03.   Right-of-Way Permits - Excavations and Temporary
Encroachments
                  12.04.   Reserved
                  12.05.   Right-of-Way Permits - Wireless Facilities
                  12.08.   Reserved
                  12.12.   Telegraph and Telephone Poles - Underground
Utilities
                  12.16.   Datum Plane
                  12.20.   Public Projects
                  12.21.   Design-Build
                  12.24.   Public Works Contracts
                  12.28.   Improvements
                  12.30.   Sight Distance Requirement
                  12.32.   House Numbers
                  12.36.   Street Grades
                  12.40.   Street Trees
                  12.44.   Obstructions
                  12.48.   Bridges
                  12.52.   Fire Hydrants
                  12.56.   Parades
                  12.60.   Vending Near Public Schools
                  12.64.   Motion Picture and Television Production Permits
                  12.68.   Park and School Grounds
                  12.72.   Clocks
                  12.76.   Seccombe Lake Park
                  12.80.   Public Parks and Recreational Facilities
                  12.84.   Off-Street Public Parking
                  12.88.   Hang Gliding
                  12.90.   Establishment, Financing and Operation of Assessment
Districts
                  12.92.   Construction and Maintenance of Sidewalks, Curbs and
Driveways
                  12.93.   City Participation in Sidewalk/Curb Repair and Sewer
Connection Costs
                  12.94.   Improvement Districts
                  12.95.   Substandard Driveway Approaches
                  12.96.   Installation and Maintenance of Landscaped Frontages
on City
                     Rights-of-Way and Within the Building Setback Area up to a
Maximum of
                     Twenty Feet
                  12.98.   Camping on Public Streets and Parks
   TITLE 13: PUBLIC UTILITIES
                  13.04.   Wells
                  13.08.   Connection with Public Sewer
                  13.12.   Cross-Connections and Backflow Prevention Devices
                  13.16.   Reserved
                  13.20.   Geothermal Resources
                  13.24.   Water Supply System
                  13.25.   Spreading or Extraction Within the Management Zone
                  13.28.   Collection of Delinquent Water, Rubbish, Sewer or
Other Municipal Utility
                     Charges
                  13.32.   Wastewater Facilities
                  13.36.   Underground Facilities
   TITLE 14: FRANCHISES
                  14.04.   General Regulations
                  14.08.   Cable, Video and Telecommunications Service
Providers
   TITLE 15: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
                  15.04.   Building Codes
                  15.05.   Property Maintenance Code
                  15.08.   Liquefaction
                  15.10.   Foothill Fire Zone Building Standards
                  15.11.   Building Safety Enhancement Area Building Standards
                  15.12.   Earthquake Hazard Reduction in Existing Buildings
                  15.16.   Uniform Fire Code
                  15.20.   Certificate of Occupancy
                  15.24.   Property Maintenance Requirements
                  15.25.   Multi-Family Rental Housing Fire Inspection Program
                  15.26.   Single-Family Rental Property Inspection Program
                  15.27.   Multi-Family Rental Housing Program Maintenance
Standards
                  15.28.   Dangerous Buildings
                  15.32.   Reserved
                  15.34.   Removal or Destruction of Trees
                  15.36.   Demolition and Moving of Buildings and Structures
                  15.37.   Historic Building Demolition Ordinance
                  15.38.   Reserved
                  15.40.   Reserved
                  15.44.   Reserved
                  15.48.   Swimming Pools
                  15.52.   Reserved
                  15.55.   City Assumption of Code Enforcement in Mobile Home
Parks
                  15.56.   Reserved
                  15.57.   Cultural Development Construction Tax
                  15.60.   Reserved
                  15.64.   Reserved
                  15.68.   Washers, Dryers, Extractors and Compressors
                  15.72.   Reserved
                  15.73.   Verdemont Area - Infrastructure Fee
                  15.74.   Violation - Penalty
   TITLE 16: SIGNS
                  16.04.   Reserved
                  16.08.   Reserved
                  16.12.   Political Signs
                  16.16.   Street Banner Permit
                  16.18.   Unauthorized Signs on Public Property
   Adopting Ordinance   11
   TITLE 17: ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                  17.04.   Reserved
                  17.05.   Hazardous Waste Management Plan
                  17.06.   Water Wise Landscape Program
                  17.07.   Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance
                  17.08.   Mobile Source Air Pollution Ordinance
   TITLE 18: RESERVED
[Reserved]
   TITLE 19: LAND USE/SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
[Reserved]
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
   References to California Codes
   References to Ordinances
   INDEX
   SECTION 4. Continuation of Existing Law. The recodification and adoption of
the City of San Bernardino Municipal Code is intended by the City Council to be
a continuation of existing provisions of the City of San Bernardino Municipal
Code, and nothing is intended to modify or enact any new laws or new taxes. To
the extent the provisions of the City of San Bernardino Municipal Code are
substantially the same as existing law, the provisions of the City of San
Bernardino Municipal Code shall be considered a continuation of existing law
and not new enactments.
   SECTION 5. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in the
City of San Bernardino Municipal Code shall be deemed repealed from and after
the effective date of this Ordinance except as they are included and reordained
in whole or in part in the City of San Bernardino Municipal Code; provided,
such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any
right established prior to the effective date of this ordinance, nor shall such
repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money,
annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises, or granting special
rights to certain persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the
issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of
real or personal property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication
of land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other
public places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary
or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
City of San Bernardino Municipal Code.
   SECTION 6. The City of San Bernardino Municipal Code shall be in full force
and effect as provided in this Ordinance, and the City of San Bernardino
Municipal Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given
   SECTION 7. Certification. City Clerk of the City of San Bernardino shall
certify to the adoption of this Ordinance and cause publication to occur in a
newspaper of general circulation and published and circulated in the City in a
manner permitted under section 36933 of the Government Code of the State of
California.
   SECTION 8. CEQA. The City Council finds this Ordinance is not subject to the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) in that the activity is covered by
the general rule that CEQA applies only to projects which have the potential
for causing a significant effect on the environment. Where it can be seen with
certainty, as in this case, that there is no possibility that the activity in
question may have a significant effect on the environment, the activity is not
subject to CEQA.
   SECTION 9. Severability. If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance, or any part thereof, is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portion of this Ordinance or any part thereof. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the
fact that any one or more section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase be declared unconstitutional. If for any reason any
portion of this ordinance is found to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the balance of this ordinance shall not be affected.
   SECTION 10. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect 30 days after
its adoption.
   APPROVED and ADOPTED by the City Council and signed by the Mayor and
attested by the City Clerk this 3rd day of September 2025.
                                                                      
                                          Helen Tran, Mayor   
                                          City of San Bernardino
Attest:
                                                          
Telicia Lopez, CMC, Acting City Clerk
Approved as to form:
                                                      
Sonia Carvalho, City Attorney
   Adopting Ordinance   13
   CERTIFICATION
STATE OF CALIFORNIA )
COUNTY OF SAN BERNARDINO) ss
CITY OF SAN BERNARDINO )
   I, Telicia Lopez, CMC, Acting City Clerk, hereby certify that the attached
is a true copy of Ordinance No. MC-1653, introduced by the City Council of the
City of San Bernardino, California, at a regular meeting held the 20th day of
August 2025. Ordinance No. MC-1653 was approved, passed and adopted at a
regular meeting held the 3rd day of September 2025 by the following vote:
Council Members:      AYES      NAYS      ABSTAIN   ABSENT
SANCHEZ            _____      _____      _______      _______
IBARRA            _____      _____      _______      _______
FIGUEROA            _____      _____      _______      _______
SHORETT            _____      _____      _______      _______
KNAUS               _____      _____      _______       _______
FLORES            _____      _____      _______      _______
ORTIZ               _____      _____      _______       _______
WITNESS my hand and official seal of the City of San Bernardino this 4th day of
September 2025.
                                                                                        
                                 Telicia Lopez, CMC, Acting City Clerk
 
CHARTER
Preamble
Article I: Names, Boundaries, Powers, Rights and Succession, Intergovernmental
Relations
   
Section 100.   Name and Boundaries
   
Section 101.   Powers of the City
   
Section 102.   Interpretation of Powers
   
Section 103.   Rights and Succession
   
Section 104.   Intergovernmental Relations
Article II: Form of Government
   
Section 200.   Form of Government
Article III: City Council and Mayor
   
Section 300.   General Powers and Duties
   
Section 301.   Composition, Eligibility, and Terms
   
Section 302.   Powers and Duties of the Council
   
Section 303.   Powers and Duties of the Mayor
   
Section 304.   Manners of Action
   
Section 305.   Compensation; Expenses
   
Section 306.   Prohibitions
   
Section 307.   Vacancies; Filling of Vacancies
   
Section 308.   Judge of Qualifications
   
Section 309.   Council Organization, Meetings and Rules of Order
Article IV: City Manager
   
Section 400.   City Manager Appointment, Qualifications and Compensation
   
Section 401.   Powers and Duties
Article V: Departments, Services, Officers and Employees
   
Section 501.   General Provisions
   
Section 502.   Direction by City Manager
   
Section 503.   Continuation of Departments
   
Section 504.   City Attorney
   
Section 505.   City Clerk
   
Section 506.   Departmental Administrators; Appointive Powers
   
Section 507.   Services
   
Section 508.   Personnel System
   
Section 509.   Official Bonds
Article VI: Boards, Commissions and Committees
   
Section 600.   General Provisions
   
Section 601.   Appointment, Removal, Terms of Office and Procedural Rules
   
Section 602.   Library
   
Section 603.   Water and Wastewater
   
Section 604.   Personnel Commission
Article VII: Financial Management
   
Section 700.   Fiscal Year
   
Section 701.   Submission of Budget and Budget Message
   
Section 702.   Budget and Capital Improvement Program
   
Section 703.   Council Action on the Budget and Capital Improvement Plan
   
Section 704.   Independent Audit
Article VIII: Elections
   
Section 800.   City Elections
   
Section 801.   Elective Officers; Terms
   
Section 802.   Number of Wards
   
Section 803.   Adjustment of Ward Boundaries
Article IX: Initiative, Citizen Referendum and Recall
   
Section 900.   Initiative, Citizen Referendum and Recall
Article X: Charter Amendments
   
Section 1000.   Charter Amendments
   
Section 1001.   Periodic Review of Charter
Article XI: Severability
   
Section 1100.   Severability
PREAMBLE
   We, the people of the City of San Bernardino, in order to secure the
benefits of home rule and a council-manager form of government, hereby adopt
this Charter.
ARTICLE I: NAMES, BOUNDARIES, POWERS, RIGHTS AND SUCCESSION, INTERGOVERNMENTAL
RELATIONS
SECTION 100. NAME AND BOUNDARIES.
   The City of San Bernardino, hereinafter termed the City, shall continue to
be a municipal corporation under its present name of “City of San Bernardino.”
The boundaries of the City shall be as now established until changed in the
manner authorized by law.
SECTION 101. POWERS OF THE CITY.
   The City shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the
constitution and laws of the State of California as fully and completely as
though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter.
SECTION 102. INTERPRETATION OF POWERS.
   The powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed in favor of the
City, and the specific mention of particular powers in the Charter shall not be
interpreted as limiting in any way the general power granted in this article.
SECTION 103. RIGHTS AND SUCCESSION.
   The City shall continue to own, possess and control all rights and property
of every kind and nature, owned, possessed or controlled by it at the time this
Charter takes effect and shall be subject to all of its debts, obligations and
liabilities.
   All ordinances, codes, resolutions, rules, regulations, and portions
thereof, in force at the time this Charter takes effect, and not in conflict or
inconsistent with this Charter, shall continue in force until they shall have
been duly repealed, amended, changed, or superseded by proper authority as
provided by this Charter.
   Subject to the provisions of this Charter, the present officers and
employees of the City shall continue to perform the duties of their respective
offices and employments under the same conditions as those of the existing
offices and positions until the election or appointment and qualification of
their successors, subject to such removal and control as provided in this
Charter.
   No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time this Charter
takes effect, brought by or against the City or any officer, office, department
or agency thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this Charter
or anything herein contained.
SECTION 104. INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS.
   The City may participate by contract or otherwise with any governmental
entity of this state or any other state or states in the United States in the
performance of any activity, which one or more of such entities has the
authority to undertake, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law.
ARTICLE II: FORM OF GOVERNMENT
SECTION 200. FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The municipal government established by this Charter is the council-manager
form of government.
ARTICLE III: CITY COUNCIL AND MAYOR
SECTION 300. GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   All powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council (“Council”), and
to the extent provided in this Charter, the Mayor. The Council shall provide
for the exercise and performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the
City by State and Federal laws.
   Except as otherwise required by law, the role of the Council is legislative,
which includes the power to set policy, approve contracts and agreements, and
undertake other obligations consistent with this Charter and the City’s
Municipal Code, while deferring to the discretion of management to choose the
appropriate means to achieve the Council’s goals.
SECTION 301. COMPOSITION, ELIGIBILITY, AND TERMS.
   (a)   Composition. The Council shall be composed of seven (7) Council
members. The term “Council,” “legislative body,” or other similar terms as used
in this Charter or any other provisions of law shall be deemed to refer to the
collective body composed of the Council members.
   (b)   Eligibility. Only registered voters of the City shall be eligible to
hold the office of Council member or Mayor. Those elected shall have been
qualified electors and residents of their respective wards for a period of at
least thirty (30) consecutive days immediately preceding the date of filing
their nomination papers for the office.
SECTION 302. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COUNCIL.
   The Council, in collaboration with the Mayor, shall ensure fundamental
municipal services are provided to protect and promote public health, safety,
and welfare. The Council and Mayor shall operate together to serve the best
interests of the City.
   The Council, in collaboration with the Mayor, will develop and implement a
Code of Conduct to guide and direct their interactions and duties, including
measures to hold one another accountable for deviations from the goals and
principles set forth in this Charter and the City Code of Conduct.
   The Council, in collaboration with the Mayor, shall create and implement a
plan to maintain the City’s fiscal integrity.
   Each Council member shall be entitled to vote on all matters coming before
the Council. The Council shall have the power to override any veto of the Mayor
by a vote of five (5) or more Council members.
   The Council shall select a Mayor Pro Tempore from one of its own members. In
the event of a temporary absence from the City, illness, or any other cause
that makes the Mayor temporarily unable to perform the duties of his or her
office, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall have all powers and authority that the
Mayor would have possessed if present to perform his or her duties.
   However, the Mayor Pro Tempore may not cast an additional vote in the event
of a tie or exercise veto powers over Council action, but may continue to
exercise his or her vote as a Council member.
SECTION 303. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall have the following powers and perform the following duties,
in addition to others as specified in this Charter:
   (a)   Attend and preside at meetings of the Council and may participate
fully in all discussions, but shall not be entitled to vote except in the event
of a tie, to veto a matter, and as otherwise provided in this Charter;
   (b)   Have the authority to veto any Council action approved by fewer than
five (5) members of the Council;
   (c)   Shall participate in the vote (1) to appoint or remove the City
Manager, City Attorney and City Clerk and fix their compensation and (2) to
appoint or remove members of boards, commissions or committees, except
committees made up wholly of less than a majority of City Council members;
   (d)   Appoint the members and officers of Council committees (committees
made up wholly of less than a majority of City Council members), and perform
other duties as specified by the Council;
   (e)   Be recognized as the head of the City government for all ceremonial
purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law;
   (f)   Be the chief spokesperson for the City; and
   (g)   Represent the City in intergovernmental relations and establish and
maintain partnerships and regional leadership roles to advance the City’s
interest; and may delegate such roles to other members of the Council; and
   (h)   Execute all ordinances, resolutions and contracts approved by the City
Council except as otherwise authorized by the City Council.
   The Mayor shall have no administrative, appointment or removal powers except
as otherwise provided in this Charter.
   The office of Mayor shall be a full-time position and the incumbent shall
not engage in any business, professional or occupational activities that
interfere with the discharge of the duties of the office.
SECTION 304. MANNERS OF ACTION.
   Actions of the Council require a simple majority vote of the quorum present
for approval unless:
   (a)   Otherwise required for charter cities under State or Federal law; or
   (b)   Required by this Charter to be approved by at least five affirmative
votes of the Mayor and members of the Council.
SECTION 305. COMPENSATION; EXPENSES.
   Compensation for the Mayor and Council members shall be established by
ordinance following a public hearing, giving due consideration to the
recommendations of an advisory commission charged with the periodic review of
compensation for City-elected officials. Compensation for the Mayor shall be
commensurate with that for a full-time position.
   No ordinance increasing such salaries shall become effective until the date
of commencement of the terms of Council members elected at the next regular
election. The Mayor and Council members shall receive reimbursement for actual
and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office.
SECTION 306. PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   Holding Other Office. No Mayor or Council member shall hold any other
City office or City employment during the term for which he or she was elected.
No former Mayor or Council member shall hold any compensated appointive office
or employment with the City until one (1) year after the expiration of the term
for which he or she was elected.
   (b)   Conflict of Interest. Elected and appointed officials shall adhere to
conflict of interest codes as established by State law and/or City ordinance.
   (c)   Appointments and Removals. Neither the Mayor nor any Council member
shall, in any manner, control or demand the appointment or removal of any City
administrative officer or employee whom the City Manager is empowered to
appoint. This does not preclude the Mayor or members of the Council from
expressing their views and fully and freely discussing with the City Manager
anything pertaining to the appointment and removal of such officers and
employees.
   (d)   Interference with Administration. Neither the Mayor nor any Council
member shall interfere with the discretion of the City Manager in the exercise
or performance of his or her powers or duties. The Mayor and Council members
shall deal with City officers and employees who are subject to the direction
and supervision of the City Manager solely through the City Manager, and shall
not give orders to or attempt to direct the work of such officers and employees
either publicly or privately. Inquiries may be made directly to officers and
employees under the supervision of the City Manager with the knowledge and
consent of the City Manager.
SECTION 307. VACANCIES; FILLING OF VACANCIES.
   (a)   Vacancies. If the Council determines any of the events enumerated in
provisions of the Government Code or California Constitution pertaining to
vacancies in public offices have occurred, the Council shall declare a vacancy
for the office of Council member or for the office of Mayor.
   (b)   Filling of Vacancies. The method of filling vacancies shall be as
prescribed by ordinance.
SECTION 308. JUDGE OF QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its
members and whether grounds exist for forfeiture of their office.
SECTION 309. COUNCIL ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS AND RULES OF ORDER.
   The Council shall establish by ordinance the time, place and the method of
calling meetings, the rules of order for the conduct of proceedings by the
Council, and the order of succession in the event of a vacancy in the office of
Mayor.
ARTICLE IV: CITY MANAGER
SECTION 400. CITY MANAGER APPOINTMENT, QUALIFICATIONS AND COMPENSATION.
   The Mayor and Council, by a vote of the Mayor and entire Council, shall
appoint a City Manager and fix the City Manager’s compensation, as provided in
section 304(b) of this Charter. The City Manager may be removed by the Mayor
and entire Council in the same manner. The City Manager shall be appointed on
the basis of education and experience in the accepted competencies and
practices of local government management. The Mayor and Council shall establish
and communicate clear expectations for the City Manager. An evaluation of the
City Manager’s performance shall be conducted at least annually.
SECTION 401. POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The City Manager shall be the chief executive officer of the City,
responsible to the Council for the management of all City affairs placed in the
City Manager’s charge by or under this Charter. The City Manager will be the
sole authority for managing City operations and appointing and directing City
staff, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
   The City Manager shall:
   (a)   Appoint and suspend or remove all City employees and appoint
administrative officers, except as otherwise provided by law, this Charter, or
established personnel rules. The City Manager may authorize any administrative
officer subject to the City Manager’s direction and supervision to exercise
these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer’s department, office
or agency;
   (b)   Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices
and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by
law;
   (c)   Attend all Council meetings. The City Manager shall have the right to
take part in the discussion but shall not vote;
   (d)   Ensure the Mayor and Council are informed on all aspects of important
emerging issues, including the City’s financial condition and future needs, and
as part of that responsibility, brief the Mayor and Council at their meetings
on the business matters before them;
   (e)   See that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and acts of the Council
are faithfully executed;
   (f)   Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital improvement program
to the Mayor and Council and implement the final budget approved by the Council
to achieve the goals of the City;
   (g)   Submit to the Mayor and Council and make available to the public a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City as of
the end of each fiscal year;
   (h)   Make such other reports as the Mayor or Council may request regarding
operations;
   (i)   Make recommendations to the Mayor and Council concerning the affairs
of the City and facilitate the work of the Council in developing policy;
   (j)   Provide staff support services for the Mayor and Council members;
   (k)   Assist the Mayor and Council in developing long-term goals for the
City and strategies to implement these goals;
   (l)   Be accountable for the implementation of Council goals and policies
and the overall performance of the City;
   (m)   Encourage and provide staff support for regional and intergovernmental
cooperation;
   (n)   Promote partnerships among the Mayor, Council, staff, and citizens in
developing public policy and building a sense of community;
   (o)   Make business and policy recommendations based solely on his or her
independent professional judgment and best practices in the interests of the
City; and
   (p)   Perform other such duties as are specified in this Charter, by
ordinance, or as may be requested by the Council.
ARTICLE V: DEPARTMENTS, SERVICES, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION 501. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The City Manager may establish City departments, offices, or agencies in
addition to those created by this Charter, subject to approval of the City
Council, and may prescribe the functions of all departments, offices and
agencies to meet the needs of the community in the most effective and efficient
manner.
SECTION 502. DIRECTION BY CITY MANAGER.
   Each City department, office and agency shall be administered by an
executive appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the City
Manager, except the Offices of the Council, Mayor, City Attorney and City
Clerk, the Library Board of Trustees, and the Water Board, which shall be
administered by their respective executive officers as provided for elsewhere
in this Charter but which shall in all other respects be governed by the
policies applicable to all other departments, offices and agencies.
   With the consent of the Council, the City Manager may serve as the executive
of one or more such departments, offices or agencies.
   The City Manager may appoint one person to serve as the executive of two or
more departments.
SECTION 503. CONTINUATION OF DEPARTMENTS.
   All departments, agencies, offices, and services in existence at the time
this Charter is adopted shall continue in the same manner as before the
adoption of this Charter, unless and until changed by ordinance or other action
approved by the City Council.
SECTION 504. CITY ATTORNEY.
   A duly qualified City Attorney shall be hired by a vote of the Mayor and
entire Council, as provided in section 304(b) of this Charter. The City
Attorney may be removed by the Mayor and entire Council in the same manner. The
City Attorney shall serve as chief legal advisor to the Council, the City
Manager and all City departments, offices and agencies; shall represent the
City in all legal proceedings; and shall perform any other duties prescribed by
State law, this Charter or by ordinance.
SECTION 505. CITY CLERK.
   A duly qualified City Clerk shall be hired by a vote of the Mayor and entire
Council, as provided in section 304(b) of this Charter. The City Clerk may be
removed by the Mayor and entire Council in the same manner. The City Clerk
shall give notice of Council meetings to its members and the public, keep the
journal of its proceedings, and shall perform any other duties prescribed by
State law, this Charter or by ordinance.
SECTION 506. DEPARTMENTAL ADMINISTRATORS; APPOINTIVE POWERS.
   Each departmental executive shall have the power to appoint, supervise,
suspend, or remove such assistants, deputies, subordinates and employees as are
provided for the department, subject to the approval of the City Manager and
subject to the provisions of the personnel rules and regulations adopted by the
Council.
SECTION 507. SERVICES.
   The City shall provide for a municipal police department. The City also
shall provide for community development, finance, fire and emergency medical
services, information technology, library, parks and recreation, personnel,
public works, water and wastewater, and such other services as the Council
deems appropriate for the public’s health, safety and welfare.
SECTION 508. PERSONNEL SYSTEM.
   All appointments and promotions of City officers and employees shall be made
solely on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by a valid and reliable
examination or other evidence of competence. The administration of employee
matters shall be delegated to a personnel or human resources department.
   Consistent with all applicable Federal and State laws, the Council shall
provide for the establishment, regulation and maintenance of a merit system and
governing personnel rules and regulations necessary for the effective
administration of the employees of the City’s departments, offices and
agencies. Such personnel rules and regulations may include but are not limited
to classification and pay plans, examinations, force reduction, removals,
working conditions, provisional and exempt appointments, in-service training,
grievances and relationships with employee organizations.
SECTION 509. OFFICIAL BONDS.
   The Council shall fix by resolution the amounts and terms of the official
bonds of all officers or employees who are required by the Council to acquire
such bonds. All bonds shall be executed by a responsible corporate surety,
shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney, and shall be filed with the
City Clerk. Premiums on official bonds shall be paid by the City.
   There shall be no personal liability upon, or any right to recover against,
a superior officer, or his or her bond, for any wrongful act or omission of his
or her subordinate, unless such superior officer was a party to, or conspired
in, such wrongful act or omission.
ARTICLE VI: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
SECTION 600. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Each board, commission and committee established prior to the adoption of
this Charter shall continue to exist, exercise the powers and perform the
duties assigned to it upon adoption of this Charter. However, the Council may
alter the structure, membership, powers and duties of boards, commissions and
committees. The Council also may abolish or create particular boards,
commissions and committees, provided that the Council may not abolish the
Commissions or Boards specifically provided for in this Charter. The Council
may grant powers and duties to boards, commissions and committees that are
consistent with the provisions of this Charter.
SECTION 601. APPOINTMENT, REMOVAL, TERMS OF OFFICE AND PROCEDURAL RULES.
   Except as provided elsewhere in this Charter, the appointment, removal, and
terms of office of boards, commissions, committees and their members and the
rules and regulations pertaining to the conduct of board, commission or
committee business shall be as prescribed by a vote of the Mayor and entire
Council, as provided in section 304(b) of this Charter. Members of boards,
commissions and committees shall be residents of the City, unless exempted by
ordinance or State law.
SECTION 602. LIBRARY.
   A Library Board of Trustees consisting of five (5) members shall be
appointed by a vote of the Mayor and entire Council, as provided in section 304
(b) to serve without compensation. The Mayor and entire Council may remove
Trustees in the same manner. The Board shall:
   a.   Be responsible for providing adequate library services;
   b.   Appoint a Library Director;
   c.   Administer the Library budget allocated by the Council;
   d.   Make and enforce all rules and regulations applicable to library
services; and
   e   Administer such additional matters as may be determined by ordinance.
SECTION 603. WATER AND WASTEWATER.
   A Water Board of five (5) Commissioners shall be appointed by a vote of the
Mayor and entire Council, as provided in section 304(b). Commissioners shall
serve terms of six (6) years each, staggered in the same manner as at the time
of the adoption of this Charter. Any one or more of these Commissioners may be
removed by a vote of the Mayor and entire Council. The Board shall have the
following powers and responsibilities:
   a.   Be responsible to oversee and manage the City’s water supply, recycled
water, wastewater collection and treatment (“Water and Wastewater Systems”)
functions in accordance with State law.
   b.   Employ such persons, including a general manager, as may be needed for
proper administration of the City’s Water and Wastewater Systems.
   c.   Set and collect all rates, fees and charges for operation of the Water
and Wastewater Systems.
   d.   Allocate all receipts and expenditures to separate, independent, Water
and Sewer Funds in accordance with State law.
   e.   Provide for an annual, independent audit of all water and wastewater
accounts, and may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary.
Copies of all auditors’ reports shall be filed with the City Clerk and Council.
   f.   Compensate members of the Water Board in accordance with actions of the
Water Board following public hearing.
   g.   Collaborate with the Council, Mayor and City Manager concerning the
City’s Water and Wastewater Systems. In this regard, the Council shall take
such actions as may be appropriate to enforce rules and regulations of the
Board.
   h.   Establish and periodically review and revise such rules and regulations
as may be appropriate for managing the City’s Water and Wastewater Systems.
SECTION 604. PERSONNEL COMMISSION.
   A Personnel Commission consisting of five (5) members shall be appointed by
a vote of the Mayor and entire Council, as provided for in section 304(b) of
this Charter, to serve without compensation. The Mayor and entire Council may
remove Commissioners in the same manner. The Commission’s sole responsibility
shall be to hear appeals of disciplinary action by City employees, subject to
the provisions of adopted labor agreements. Decisions of the Commission shall
be final without further review within the City.
ARTICLE VII: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
SECTION 700. FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of July of each
year and end on the last day of June of the following year. The Council may
change the fiscal year by ordinance.
SECTION 701. SUBMISSION OF BUDGET AND BUDGET MESSAGE.
   At least sixty (60) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the
City Manager shall prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council the proposed
budget and an accompanying message. The City Manager’s budget message shall
explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs,
linking those programs to organizational goals and community priorities. It
shall outline the proposed financial policies of the City for the ensuing
fiscal year and the impact of those policies on future years. It shall describe
the important features of the budget and indicate any major changes from the
current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues, together with
the reasons for such changes. It shall summarize the City’s debt position,
including factors affecting the ability to raise resources through debt issues,
and include other such material as the City Manager deems desirable.
SECTION 702. BUDGET AND CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.
   The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all City funds and
activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law or this
Charter, shall be in such form as the City Manager deems desirable or the
Council or Mayor may request for effective management and understanding of the
relationship between the budget and the City’s strategic goals. In addition,
the City Manager shall prepare and submit a multi-year capital improvement plan
(CIP). The CIP shall be revised and extended each year with regard to capital
improvements still pending or in the process of construction or acquisition.
   The City’s budget and CIP should strive to achieve the best practice
standards set by the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) for
distinguished budget presentation.
SECTION 703. COUNCIL ACTION ON THE BUDGET AND CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
   The Council shall publish a general summary of the budget and CIP and hold
one (1) or more public hearings. After the public hearing(s), the Budget and
CIP shall be adopted, as they may be amended, by the Council before the
beginning of each fiscal year.
SECTION 704. INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
   The Council shall provide for an annual independent audit of all City
accounts and may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary. An
independent certified public accountant or firm of such accountants shall make
such audits, which should be performed in accordance with General Accepted
Auditing Standards (GAAS) and Generally Accepted Governmental Auditing
Standards (GAGAS). Using competitive bidding, the Council shall designate such
accountant or firm for a period not to exceed five (5) years.
   As soon as practicable after the end of the fiscal year, a final certified
audit and report shall be submitted by such accountant to the Mayor, each
member of the Council, the City Manager, Finance Director and City Attorney.
Three (3) additional copies shall be placed on file in the office of the City
Clerk, where they shall be available for inspection by the general public, and
the audit and report shall be published on the City’s website.
ARTICLE VIII: ELECTIONS
SECTION 800. CITY ELECTIONS.
   Beginning in 2018, primary and general election shall be held in said City
in consolidation with the State Primary Election and the State General Election
and every two (2) years thereafter. City elections shall follow the provisions
and procedures of the Ttate Elections Code as applicable to general law cities.
The Mayor and Council members shall be sworn in and begin their term of service
upon certification of the election results, and shall serve until their
successors qualify.
   To facilitate the transition of elections from odd to even numbered years,
consistent with the timing of elections for state and federal offices, the
terms of the Mayor and each Council member in office at the time of the
adoption of this Charter shall be extended for one (1) year.
SECTION 801. ELECTIVE OFFICERS; TERMS.
   The elective officers of the City shall consist of a Mayor and seven Council
members. Council members shall continue to be elected for terms of four (4)
years, with such terms staggered between the wards as established by ordinance.
Each Council member shall be elected by ward by the voters within that ward.
The Mayor shall continue to be elected at large for a term of four years.
SECTION 802. NUMBER OF WARDS.
   There shall be seven (7) wards.
SECTION 803. ADJUSTMENT OF WARD BOUNDARIES.
   Periodic adjustments to ward boundaries shall be made to maintain each in
compact form and as nearly equal in population as possible, consistent with
applicable State and Federal laws.
ARTICLE IX: INITIATIVE, CITIZEN REFERENDUM AND RECALL
SECTION 900. INITIATIVE, CITIZEN REFERENDUM AND RECALL.
   Initiatives, citizen referenda, and recalls shall follow the procedures of
the State Elections Code, as applicable to general law cities.
ARTICLE X: CHARTER AMENDMENTS
SECTION 1000. CHARTER AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this Charter shall be made in accordance with the procedures
of the State Elections Code, as applicable to charter cities.
SECTION 1001. PERIODIC REVIEW OF CHARTER.
   By December 2017, the Council shall establish a process to ensure the
periodic review of this Charter to identify potential amendments that enhance
clarity, efficiency, and the principles of the council-manager form of
government.
ARTICLE XI: SEVERABILITY
SECTION 1100. SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the other provisions of
the Charter shall not be affected. If the application of the Charter or any of
its provisions to any persons or circumstance is held invalid, the application
of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not
be affected.
TITLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
1.01.   CODE ADOPTION
      
1.04.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
1.08.   RESOLUTIONS AND ORDINANCES
      
1.12.   GENERAL PENALTY
      
1.16.   BOUNDARIES OF WARDS
      
1.20.   WORKING OF PROBATIONERS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
      
1.24.   DESIGNATION OF OLD CITY
      
1.26.   TIME LIMITATIONS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE MANDAMUS PROCEEDINGS
      
1.28.   RESERVED
CHAPTER 1.01: CODE ADOPTION
Section
   
1.01.010   Adoption
   
1.01.020   Title - citation - reference
   
1.01.030   Codification authority
   
1.01.040   Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code
   
1.01.050   Reference applies to all amendments
   
1.01.060   Title, chapter and section headings
   
1.01.070   Reference to specific ordinances
   
1.01.080   Effect of code on past actions and obligations
   
1.01.090   Effective date
   
1.01.100   Constitutionality
Statutory reference:
   For provisions authorizing cities to codify their ordinances, see Cal. Gov’t
Code, §§ 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10
§ 1.01.010 ADOPTION.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 50022.1 through 50022.8
and 50022.10, there is adopted the “San Bernardino Municipal Code,” together
with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the state
legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are
deleted or modified by the provisions of the “San Bernardino Municipal Code.”
(Ord. 3981, passed 10-29-1980)
§ 1.01.020 TITLE - CITATION - REFERENCE.
   (A)   This code shall be known as the “San Bernardino Municipal Code” and it
shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “San Bernardino Municipal
Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any
proceeding at law or equity.
   (B)   It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending,
correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to,
amendment to, correction or repeal of the “San Bernardino Municipal Code.”
   (C)   Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and
divisions of the “San Bernardino Municipal Code” and such references shall
apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or division as it appears in the
code.
(Ord. 3981, passed 10-29-1980)
§ 1.01.030 CODIFICATION AUTHORITY.
   This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of
the administrative ordinances of the city codified pursuant to the provisions
of Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10.
(Ord. 3981, passed 10-29-1980)
§ 1.01.040 ORDINANCES PASSED PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF THE CODE.
   The last ordinance included in this code at the time of its adoption was
Ordinance 3848, passed July 9, 1979. The following ordinances, passed
subsequent to Ordinance 3848, but prior to adoption of this code, are made a
part of this code: Ordinances 3849, 3850, 3851, 3852, 3853, 3854, 3855, 3856,
3857, 3858, 3859, 3860, 3861, 3862, 3863, 3864, 3865, 3866, 3867, 3868, 3869,
3870, 3871, 3872, 3873, 3874, 3875, 3876, 3877, 3878, 3879, 3880, 3881, 3882,
3883, 3884, 3885, 3886, 3887, 3888, 3889, 3890, 3891, 3892, 3893, 3894, 3895,
3896, 3897, 3898, 3899, 3900, 3901, 3902, 3903, 3904, 3905, 3906, 3907, 3908,
3909, 3910, 3911, 3912, 3913, 3914, 3915, 3916, 3917, 3918, 3919, 3920, 3921,
3922, 3923, 3924, 3925, 3926, 3927, 3928, 3929, 3930, 3931, 3932, 3933, 3934,
3935, 3936, 3937, 3938, 3939, 3940, 3941, 3942, 3943, 3944, 3945, 3946, 3947,
3948, 3949, 3950, 3951, 3952, 3953, 3954, 3955, 3956, 3957, 3958, 3959, 3960,
3961, 3962, 3963, 3964, 3965, 3966, 3967, 3968, 3971, 3974, 3976 and 3977.
(Ord. 3981, passed 10-29-1980; Ord. MC-36, passed 3-25-1981)
§ 1.01.050 REFERENCE APPLIES TO ALL AMENDMENTS.
   Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “San Bernardino Municipal
Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city, the reference
shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or
hereafter made.
(Ord. 3981, passed 10-29-1980)
§ 1.01.060 TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS.
   Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to
govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of
the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof.
(Ord. 3981, passed 10-29-1980)
§ 1.01.070 REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record
which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein
specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within
the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding
provisions contained within this code.
(Ord. 3981, passed 10-29-1980)
§ 1.01.080 EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS.
   Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment of any
ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner
affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were
committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of
any license, fee or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such
ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such
ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or
the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the
validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted,
filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations
thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 3981, passed 10-29-1980)
§ 1.01.090 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this
code as the “San Bernardino Municipal Code” shall become effective.
(Ord. 3981, passed 10-29-1980)
§ 1.01.100 CONSTITUTIONALITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The Mayor and City Council
declare that it would have passed this code, and each section, division,
sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, divisions, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared
invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared
invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be
in full force and effect.
(Ord. 3981, passed 10-29-1980)
CHAPTER 1.04: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
1.04.010   Definitions
   
1.04.020   Title of office
   
1.04.030   Interpretation of language
   
1.04.040   Grammatical interpretation
   
1.04.050   Acts by agents
   
1.04.060   Prohibited acts include causing and permitting
   
1.04.070   Computation of time
   
1.04.080   Construction
   
1.04.090   Repeal shall not revive any ordinances
   
1.04.100   Rewards
§ 1.04.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino, California, or the area within the
territorial limits of the City of San Bernardino, California, and such
territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control
by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of San Bernardino. ALL ITS MEMBERS or
ALL COUNCIL MEMBERS means the total number of Council members holding office.
   COUNTY. The County of San Bernardino.
   LAW. Denotes applicable federal law, the California Constitution and
statutes of the State of California, the ordinances of the City of San
Bernardino and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may
be promulgated thereunder.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   MUST and SHALL. The acts referred to are each mandatory.
   OATH. Includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law,
an affirmation may be substituted for an OATH, and in such cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OWNER. Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part
of such building or land.
   PERSON. Includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust,
organization or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any
of them.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and
evidences of debt.
   PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   SIDEWALKS. The portion of a street intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of California.
   STREET. Includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts,
places, squares, curbs or other public ways in the City of San Bernardino,
which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such
other public property so designated in any law of this state.
   TENANT and OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, include any person who
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
   WRITTEN. Includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed or
otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
(Ord. 3843, passed 7-11-1979)
§ 1.04.020 TITLE OF OFFICE.
   Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission
means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city.
(Ord. 3843, passed 7-11-1979)
§ 1.04.030 INTERPRETATION OF LANGUAGE.
   All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and
approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others
as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be
construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
(Ord. 3843, passed 7-11-1979)
§ 1.04.040 GRAMMATICAL INTERPRETATION.
   The following grammatical rules shall apply to the ordinances and
resolutions of the city unless it is apparent from the content that a different
construction is intended.
   (A)   Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter
genders.
   (B)   Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular.
   (C)   Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the
future tenses and vice versa unless manifestly inapplicable.
(Ord. 3843, passed 7-11-1979)
§ 1.04.050 ACTS BY AGENTS.
   When an act is required by an ordinance or resolution, the same being such
that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement
shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent.
(Ord. 3843, passed 7-11-1979)
§ 1.04.060 PROHIBITED ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING AND PERMITTING.
   Whenever, in the ordinances of the city, any act or omission is made
unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting,
suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission.
(Ord. 3843, passed 7-11-1979)
§ 1.04.070 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to
be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last
day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be
excluded.
(Ord. 3843, passed 7-11-1979)
§ 1.04.080 CONSTRUCTION.
   The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under
them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote
justice.
(Ord. 3843, passed 7-11-1979)
§ 1.04.090 REPEAL SHALL NOT REVIVE ANY ORDINANCES.
   The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an
ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby.
(Ord. 3843, passed 7-11-1979)
§ 1.04.100 REWARDS.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council may, by resolution, establish a reward of
not to exceed $1,000 for anyone providing information leading to the arrest and
conviction of any person for the commission of a misdemeanor or infraction
within the city limits of the city.
   (B)   If the reward is payable to two or more persons, it shall be divided
equally between such persons.
   (C)   Any person convicted for a violation of such misdemeanor or infraction
shall be liable for the amount of any reward paid pursuant to this section and
any resolution adopted pursuant hereto, and if he or she is an unemancipated
minor, his or her parent or guardian shall be liable for the amount.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Mayor and
Council to offer any other reward under general law.
(Ord. MC-683, passed 11-20-1989)
CHAPTER 1.08: RESOLUTIONS AND ORDINANCES
Section
   
1.08.010   Purpose
   
1.08.020   Presentation to Mayor
   
1.08.030   Action by Mayor
   
1.08.040   Readoption
   
1.08.050   Effective dates - readoption
   
1.08.060   Charter amendments
   
1.08.070   Time is not of essence
   
1.08.080   Validity presumed
   
1.08.090   Effective dates
§ 1.08.010 PURPOSE.
   The procedures set forth in this chapter are established to implement the
provisions of Charter, §
304, which provides that resolutions and ordinances shall be adopted by a
simple majority vote of the quorum of the City Council present, unless a
specific different affirmative vote level is required by the Charter or for
charter cities under state or federal law. All resolutions and ordinances must
be approved by the Mayor, or alternatively, vetoed by the Mayor with written
reasons therefor, endorsed on such resolutions or ordinances within five days
after the City Clerk presents the resolutions and ordinances to the Mayor,
pursuant to the requirement of §
1.08.030.
(Ord. 3751, passed 8-25-1978; Ord. MC-1439, passed 4-3-2017)
§ 1.08.020 PRESENTATION TO MAYOR.
   Each resolution and ordinance adopted by the City Council shall be presented
by the City Clerk to the Mayor for his or her approval or disapproval within 48
hours after the adjournment of the meeting at which the resolution or ordinance
was adopted. The Mayor shall designate an employee in his or her office to
receive the resolution or ordinance. In the event the Mayor is absent or
unavailable during the 48-hour period, the City Clerk shall present the
resolution or ordinance to any employee in the office of the Mayor who has been
designated by the Mayor as his or her agent to receive such resolution or
ordinance, or in the absence of the Mayor during the 48-hour period, to the
Mayor Pro Tempore.
(Ord. 3751, passed 8-25-1978)
§ 1.08.030 ACTION BY MAYOR.
   Within five days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after the City
Clerk has presented the resolution or ordinance to the Mayor or the City
employee designated by the Mayor, the Mayor shall approve, or if the resolution
or ordinance was approved by fewer than five votes of the City Council, may
veto, the resolution or ordinance stating the reason or reasons for the veto of
the resolution or ordinance on a document physically attached thereto. Approval
or veto is a duty and there shall be no right to fail to either approve or veto
within the five-day period. In the event the Mayor is absent or otherwise
unable to approve or veto the resolution or ordinance during the five-day
period, the Mayor Pro Tempore, as empowered pursuant to City Charter, §
302, shall approve, but may not veto, the resolution or ordinance in like
manner as the Mayor would have been empowered and required to do. In the event
the Mayor approves or fails to approve or veto the resolution or ordinance
within the five-day period, or in the event the Mayor Pro Tempore acting in the
place of the Mayor approves or fails to approve the resolution or ordinance,
the resolution or ordinance shall be deemed to be validly enacted on the date
of its adoption and conclusively presumed to have been approved; provided it
was adopted by the requisite number of votes required pursuant to §
1.08.010 and the City Charter.
(Ord. 3751, passed 8-25-1978; Ord. MC-1439, passed 4-3-2017)
§ 1.08.040 READOPTION.
   The approved or vetoed resolution or ordinance shall be forthwith returned
to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall place any vetoed resolution or
ordinance which was adopted by fewer than five affirmative votes as the first
business item on the agenda for the next meeting of the Mayor and City Council
to be considered by the City Council for readoption after the resolution or
ordinance is reintroduced and the reason or reasons for the veto are read by
the City Clerk. In the event there are less than seven Council members present,
or for any other reason, the resolution or ordinance may be continued from time
to time. A motion to readopt the resolution or ordinance shall be considered
and voted upon by the City Council. Five or more affirmative votes shall be
necessary to validly readopt the resolution or ordinance.
(Ord. 3751, passed 8-25-1978; Ord. MC-1439, passed 4-3-2017)
§ 1.08.050 EFFECTIVE DATES - READOPTION.
   The resolution or ordinance which was disapproved, or neither approved nor
disapproved, within the five-day period, and which has been validly readopted
and enacted, shall take effect as if approved by the Mayor. Such resolution
shall take effect upon the date of its readoption and enactment.
(Ord. 3751, passed 8-25-1978)
§ 1.08.060 CHARTER AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to the Charter shall be made in accordance with the procedures of
the California Elections Code, as applicable to charter cities.
(Ord. 3751, passed 8-25-1978; Ord. MC-1439, passed 4-3-2017)
§ 1.08.070 TIME IS NOT OF ESSENCE.
   The failure of the City Clerk, Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore to comply with any
of the ministerial acts provided for in this chapter or the periods of time
for:
   (A)   Presenting the resolution or ordinance to the Mayor;
   (B)   Approving or vetoing the resolution or ordinance; and
   (C)   Readopting a vetoed resolution or ordinance at the next meeting of the
City Council shall not invalidate a resolution or ordinance which has been
otherwise validly adopted, readopted or enacted pursuant to this chapter and
the City Charter.
(Ord. 3751, passed 8-25-1978; Ord. MC-1439, passed 4-3-2017)
§ 1.08.080 VALIDITY PRESUMED.
   Any ordinance or resolution heretofore adopted by the City Council, which is
vetoed or not approved by the Mayor in a manner other than as provided in this
chapter, or which is heretofore adopted and enacted pursuant to the provisions
of City Charter, §
304, as interpreted by administrative and legislative practices, shall be
conclusively presumed to be valid and enforceable.
(Ord. 3751, passed 8-25-1978; Ord. MC-1439, passed 4-3-2017)
§ 1.08.090 EFFECTIVE DATES.
   (A)   Each ordinance of the Mayor and City Council shall take effect 30 days
from and after the date of its adoption by the City Council if approved by the
Mayor. Each resolution shall take effect on the date of its adoption by City
Council if approved by the Mayor.
   (B)   This section shall not be applicable to:
      (1)   Ordinances and resolutions adopted by fewer than five affirmative
votes and which are vetoed by the Mayor of the city within the five-day period;
      (2)   Ordinances which contain urgency or emergency clauses providing for
immediate effective dates;
      (3)   An ordinance or resolution which contains express language
providing for an effective date for such ordinance or resolution;
      (4)   Ordinances and resolutions adopted by five or more affirmative
votes of the City Council which are not approved within the five-day period by
the Mayor, which shall be deemed to take effect upon adoption by the City
Council; and
      (5)   Ordinances and resolutions relating to Charter amendments as
provided in §
1.08.060.
(Ord. 3751, passed 8-25-1978; Ord. MC-1439, passed 4-3-2017)
CHAPTER 1.12: GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
1.12.010   Designated
   
1.12.020   Separate offense
§ 1.12.010 DESIGNATED.
   (A)   The punishment for any offense declared to be a misdemeanor or
declared to be unlawful with no designation as to the nature of the offense by
the Charter or an ordinance, except in cases where a different offense or a
different punishment is prescribed by ordinance or any applicable law of this
state, is imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months, or a fine
not exceeding $1,000, or both such imprisonment and fine.
   (B)   The punishment for any offense declared to be an infraction by the
Charter or an ordinance, excepting places where a different offense or a
different punishment is prescribed by ordinance or any applicable law of this
state, is a fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation; a fine not exceeding
$200 for a second violation thereof within one year; and a fine not exceeding
$500 for each additional violation thereof within one year. Upon conviction of
a fourth violation thereof within one year, the violator is guilty of a
misdemeanor, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable as in division (A)
above.
   (C)   Payment of any fine or service of a jail sentence herein provided
shall not relieve a person firm, partnership, corporation or other entity from
the responsibility of correcting any condition, resulting from the violation.
In addition to the above penalties, the court may order that the guilty party
reimburse the city for all of its costs of investigating, analyzing and
prosecuting the enforcement action against the guilty party; the court shall
fix the amount of such reimbursement upon submission of proof of such costs by
the city.
(Ord. 2673, passed 6-27-1965; Ord. MC-455, passed 5-13-1985; Ord. MC-609,
passed 9-21-1987; Ord. MC-1125, passed 6-3-2002)
§ 1.12.020 SEPARATE OFFENSE.
   Every person continuing or committing the violation of any provisions of an
ordinance declaring any act or omission to be unlawful is guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or portion of any day which any violation of any
provision of such ordinance is committed.
(Ord. 2673, passed 6-27-1965; Ord. MC-455, passed 5-13-1985)
CHAPTER 1.16: BOUNDARIES OF WARDS
Section
   
1.16.010   Purpose
   
1.16.020   First Ward
   
1.16.030   Second Ward
   
1.16.040   Third Ward
   
1.16.050   Fourth Ward
   
1.16.060   Fifth Ward
   
1.16.070   Sixth Ward
   
1.16.080   Seventh Ward
§ 1.16.010 PURPOSE.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted in order to divide the
area of the city into seven wards, pursuant to
Article VIII of the City Charter.
(Ord. 3222, passed 1-4-1972; Ord. MC-1567, passed 12-15-2021)
§ 1.16.020 FIRST WARD.
   The region bounded and described as follows: beginning at the point of
intersection of Perris Hill Rd and Unnamed 144656262 (TLID:144359581), and
proceeding southerly along Perris Hill Rd to E Base Line St, and proceeding
easterly along E Base Line St to Tippecanoe St, and proceeding northerly along
Tippecanoe St to Unnamed 647112540 (TLID:144359678), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 647112540 (TLID:144359678) to Unnamed 647989649 (TLID:144365740),
and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647989649 (TLID:144365740) to Conejo Dr,
and proceeding southerly along Conejo Dr to Unnamed 647112470 (TLID:144365730),
and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647112470 (TLID:144365730) to E Base
Line St, and proceeding easterly along E Base Line St to Glasgow Ave, and
proceeding northerly along Glasgow Ave to Unnamed 647130210 (TLID:144366358),
and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647130210 (TLID:144366358) to Unnamed
647130210 (TLID:144366307), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647130210
(TLID:144366307) to E Base Line St, and proceeding easterly along E Base Line
St to Base Line St, and proceeding easterly along Base Line St to Alamo St, and
proceeding southerly along Alamo St to Unnamed 651417898 (TLID:144368115), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 651417898 (TLID:144368115) to Unnamed
651421919 (TLID:144368109), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 651421919
(TLID:144368109) to Unnamed 651421921 (TLID:144368454), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 651421921 (TLID:144368454) to Unnamed 651641533 (TLID:144368097),
and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 651641533 (TLID:144368097) to Unnamed
145224544 (TLID:144368083), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 145224544
(TLID:144368083) to Warm Crk, and proceeding westerly along Warm Crk to Unnamed
647991105 (TLID:144367999), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647991105
(TLID:144367999) to Warm Crk, and proceeding westerly along Warm Crk to Unnamed
651712831 (TLID:144367816), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 651712831
(TLID:144367816) to Unnamed 145220231 (TLID:144365651), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 145220231 (TLID:144365651) to E 9th St, and proceeding
easterly along E 9th St to Unnamed 144656448 (TLID:144366947), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 144656448 (TLID:144366947) to Elmwood Rd, and
proceeding southerly along Elmwood Rd to Unnamed 615019970 (TLID:144355392),
and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 615019970 (TLID:144355392) to E 6th St,
and proceeding westerly along E 6th St to Unnamed 651417064 (TLID:144353868),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651417064 (TLID:144353868) to Fairfax
Ln, and proceeding northerly along Fairfax Ln to Unnamed 651416891 (TLID:
144365106), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 651416891 (TLID:144365106) to
Unnamed 651416893 (TLID:144365151), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
651416893 (TLID:144365151) to E 9th St, and proceeding westerly along E 9th St
to N Tippecanoe Ave, and proceeding southerly along N Tippecanoe Ave to Unnamed
647112735 (TLID:144358716), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647112735
(TLID:144358716) to Unnamed 647112736 (TLID:144358210), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 647112736 (TLID:144358210) to Pedley Rd, and proceeding southerly
along Pedley Rd to E 6th St, and proceeding westerly along E 6th St to Unnamed
647112894 (TLID:144349640), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647112894
(TLID:144349640) to Unnamed 647112893 (TLID:144349597), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 647112893 (TLID:144349597) to 5th St, and proceeding
easterly along 5th St to Pedley Rd, and proceeding southerly along Pedley Rd to
E Monterey Ave, and proceeding westerly along E Monterey Ave to Unnamed
144734669 (TLID:144348166), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144734669
(TLID:144348166) to 5th St, and proceeding westerly along 5th St to Unnamed
647113095 (TLID:144347488), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647113095
(TLID:144347488) to E 6th St, and proceeding easterly along E 6th St to Unnamed
647113056 (TLID:144348251), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647113056
(TLID:144348251) to Unnamed 647113053 (TLID:144348203), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 647113053 (TLID:144348203) to E 6th St, and proceeding westerly
along E 6th St to N Waterman Ave, and proceeding southerly along N Waterman Ave
to Ward St, and proceeding easterly along Ward St to Unnamed 646972504 (TLID:
144316438), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 646972504 (TLID:144316438)
to Unnamed 646972505 (TLID:144316432), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
646972505 (TLID:144316432) to 5th St, and proceeding westerly along 5th St to N
Waterman Ave, and proceeding southerly along N Waterman Ave to Unnamed
144655672 (TLID:144316369), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144655672
(TLID:144316369) to E Monterey Ave, and proceeding easterly along E Monterey
Ave to Unnamed 144655684 (TLID:144316211), and proceeding southerly along
Unnamed 144655684 (TLID:144316211) to Unnamed 144655684 (TLID:144316196), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144655684 (TLID:144316196) to N Waterman Ave,
and proceeding southerly along N Waterman Ave to E 3rd St, and proceeding
easterly along E 3rd St to Unnamed 651426282 (TLID:144355286), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 651426282 (TLID:144355286) to Unnamed 651426263 (TLID:
144355468), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651426263 (TLID:144355468)
to 5th St, and proceeding easterly along 5th St to Unnamed 651715800 (TLID:
144356054), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 651715800 (TLID:144356054) to
Sterling Ave, and proceeding northerly along Sterling Ave to Unnamed 644393416
(TLID:144441553), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 644393416 (TLID:
144441553) to Unnamed 144733344 (TLID:144442117), and proceeding easterly along
Unnamed 144733344 (TLID:144442117) to Cypress St, and proceeding easterly along
Cypress St to Unnamed 633185440 (TLID:144442135), and proceeding southerly
along Unnamed 633185440 (TLID:144442135) to Unnamed 633185439 (TLID:144437027),
and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 633185439 (TLID:144437027) to Unnamed
144661367 (TLID:144437000), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 144661367
(TLID:144437000) to 5th St, and proceeding easterly along 5th St to Unnamed
651711059 (TLID:144437481), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 651711059
(TLID:144437481) to Leslie Ln, and proceeding southerly along Leslie Ln to 5th
St, and proceeding easterly along 5th St to Unnamed 144661446 (TLID:144437596),
and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144661446 (TLID:144437596) to Roberts St,
and proceeding northerly along Roberts St to E 6th St, and proceeding easterly
along E 6th St to Victoria Ave, and proceeding southerly along Victoria Ave to
5th St, and proceeding easterly along 5th St to Unnamed 651693784 (TLID:
144439262), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 651693784 (TLID:144439262) to
Victoria Ave, and proceeding southerly along Victoria Ave to E 3rd St, and
proceeding easterly along E 3rd St to Alabama St, and proceeding southerly
along Alabama St to Unnamed 653203528 (TLID:144440600), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 653203528 (TLID:144440600) to Unnamed 144663103 (TLID:144440550),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144663103 (TLID:144440550) to Unnamed
650799998 (TLID:144440520), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 650799998
(TLID:144440520) to Unnamed 650799995 (TLID:144438711), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 650799995 (TLID:144438711) to Unnamed 145001430 (TLID:144438471),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 145001430 (TLID:144438471) to Unnamed
145001427 (TLID:144438464), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 145001427
(TLID:144438464) to Unnamed 650412522 (TLID:144438453), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 650412522 (TLID:144438453) to Unnamed 653206701 (TLID:
144436795), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 653206701 (TLID:144436795) to
Unnamed 651112994 (TLID:144436765), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
651112994 (TLID:144436765) to Unnamed 651112993 (TLID:144436747), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 651112993 (TLID:144436747) to Unnamed
144695857 (TLID:144436620), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144695857
(TLID:144436620) to Unnamed 144662806 (TLID:144436586), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 144662806 (TLID:144436586) to Unnamed 629788827 (TLID:144436264),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 629788827 (TLID:144436264) to Mountain
View Ave, and proceeding southerly along Mountain View Ave to Unnamed 616550910
(TLID:144352127), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 616550910 (TLID:
144352127) to Unnamed 651716836 (TLID:144350825), and proceeding westerly along
Unnamed 651716836 (TLID:144350825) to S Tippecanoe Ave, and proceeding
northerly along S Tippecanoe Ave to Unnamed 644217699 (TLID:144350916), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 644217699 (TLID:144350916) to E Mill St, and
proceeding westerly along E Mill St to Unnamed 144659164 (TLID:144344770), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144659164 (TLID:144344770) to E Mill St, and
proceeding westerly along E Mill St to S Allen St, and proceeding northerly
along S Allen St to E Rialto Ave, and proceeding westerly along E Rialto Ave to
W Rialto Ave, and proceeding westerly along W Rialto Ave to N Mount Vernon Ave,
and proceeding northerly along N Mount Vernon Ave to Burlington Northern Santa
Fe Rlwy, and proceeding northerly along Burlington Northern Santa Fe Rlwy to N
Mount Vernon Ave, and proceeding northerly along N Mount Vernon Ave to W 4th
St, and proceeding westerly along W 4th St to W Foothill Blvd, and proceeding
easterly along W Foothill Blvd to Unnamed 614872079 (TLID:144113946), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 614872079 (TLID:144113946) to Unnamed
614872080 (TLID:144127520), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 614872080
(TLID:144127520) to W 9th St, and proceeding easterly along W 9th St to N Mount
Vernon Ave, and proceeding northerly along N Mount Vernon Ave to W Base Line
St, and proceeding easterly along W Base Line St to W Baseline St, and
proceeding easterly along W Baseline St to W Baseline Rd, and proceeding
easterly along W Baseline Rd to W Base Line St, and proceeding easterly along W
Base Line St to E Base Line St, and proceeding easterly along E Base Line St to
N Wall Ave, and proceeding easterly along N Wall Ave to E Base Line St, and
proceeding easterly along E Base Line St to Windsor Dr, and proceeding easterly
along Windsor Dr to E Base Line St, and proceeding easterly along E Base Line
St to East Twin Crk, and proceeding northerly along East Twin Crk to Twin Creek
Dr, and proceeding northerly along Twin Creek Dr to Unnamed 144656241 (TLID:
144359290), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144656241 (TLID:144359290) to
Barton St, and proceeding northerly along Barton St to Unnamed 144656262 (TLID:
144359581), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144656262 (TLID:144359581) to
the point of beginning.
(Ord. MC-1376, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. MC-1567, passed 12-15-2021)
§ 1.16.030 SECOND WARD.
   The region bounded and described as follows: beginning at the point of
intersection of N Muscupiabe Dr and Foothill Fwy, and proceeding southerly
along N Muscupiabe Dr to W Colima Rd, and proceeding westerly along W Colima Rd
to N Muscupiabe Dr, and proceeding southerly along N Muscupiabe Dr to W
Highland Ave, and proceeding easterly along W Highland Ave to N D St, and
proceeding easterly along N D St to W Highland Ave, and proceeding easterly
along W Highland Ave to E Highland Ave, and proceeding easterly along E
Highland Ave to N del Rosa Ave, and proceeding northerly along N del Rosa Ave
to Foothill Fwy, and proceeding easterly along Foothill Fwy to Unnamed
647110791 (TLID:144375148), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647110791
(TLID:144375148) to Unnamed 647110790 (TLID:144375139), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 647110790 (TLID:144375139) to Date Pl, and proceeding
westerly along Date Pl to Unnamed 647110823 (TLID:144375101), and proceeding
westerly along Unnamed 647110823 (TLID:144375101) to Chiquita Ln, and
proceeding northerly along Chiquita Ln to Unnamed 647110810 (TLID:144374483),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647110810 (TLID:144374483) to Unnamed
647110806 (TLID:144374419), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647110806
(TLID:144374419) to Ulysses Ct, and proceeding westerly along Ulysses Ct to
Taylor Rd, and proceeding southerly along Taylor Rd to Pumalo St, and
proceeding easterly along Pumalo St to Unnamed 647128735 (TLID:144375376), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647128735 (TLID:144375376) to Unnamed
647128734 (TLID:144447689), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647128734
(TLID:144447689) to Unnamed 647128731 (TLID:144447734), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 647128731 (TLID:144447734) to Unnamed 647128727 (TLID:144447803),
and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647128727 (TLID:144447803) to Unnamed
647128724 (TLID:144447863), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647128724
(TLID:144447863) to E Pumalo St, and proceeding easterly along E Pumalo St to
Unnamed 144993083 (TLID:144448559), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
144993083 (TLID:144448559) to Date St E, and proceeding easterly along Date St
E to Arden Ave, and proceeding southerly along Arden Ave to Unnamed 644155234
(TLID:144451369), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 644155234 (TLID:
144451369) to E Pumalo St, and proceeding easterly along E Pumalo St to Arden
Ave, and proceeding southerly along Arden Ave to Unnamed 144661137 (TLID:
144451420), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144661137 (TLID:144451420) to
Unnamed 647991082 (TLID:144452495), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
647991082 (TLID:144452495) to Unnamed 647128521 (TLID:144452579), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647128521 (TLID:144452579) to Date St E, and
proceeding easterly along Date St E to Sand Crk, and proceeding southerly along
Sand Crk to Unnamed 651698318 (TLID:144452726), and proceeding southerly along
Unnamed 651698318 (TLID:144452726) to Unnamed 651422988 (TLID:144451243), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 651422988 (TLID:144451243) to Unnamed
651422897 (TLID:144451223), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 651422897
(TLID:144451223) to Unnamed 651422887 (TLID:144451170), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 651422887 (TLID:144451170) to Unnamed 651422887 (TLID:144451161),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 651422887 (TLID:144451161) to E 20th St,
and proceeding westerly along E 20th St to Valaria Dr, and proceeding southerly
along Valaria Dr to Unnamed 651422761 (TLID:144450691), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 651422761 (TLID:144450691) to Unnamed 651422693 (TLID:144450642),
and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 651422693 (TLID:144450642) to Unnamed
651422689 (TLID:144450561), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 651422689
(TLID:144450561) to Unnamed 651707125 (TLID:144450498), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 651707125 (TLID:144450498) to E 17th St, and proceeding
easterly along E 17th St to Unnamed 651422451 (TLID:144450038), and proceeding
easterly along Unnamed 651422451 (TLID:144450038) to Unnamed 651422454 (TLID:
144450397), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 651422454 (TLID:144450397) to
Rockford Ave, and proceeding southerly along Rockford Ave to Unnamed 651422390
(TLID:144450023), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 651422390 (TLID:
144450023) to Unnamed 651422392 (TLID:144450017), and proceeding southerly
along Unnamed 651422392 (TLID:144450017) to Pacific St, and proceeding easterly
along Pacific St to Unnamed 648189523 (TLID:144455368), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 648189523 (TLID:144455368) to Unnamed 648189524 (TLID:
144454925), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 648189524 (TLID:144454925)
to Baseline St, and proceeding westerly along Baseline St to Unnamed 632474365
(TLID:144445499), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 632474365 (TLID:
144445499) to Unnamed 632474368 (TLID:144445557), and proceeding northerly
along Unnamed 632474368 (TLID:144445557) to Unnamed 648189539 (TLID:144445544),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 648189539 (TLID:144445544) to Unnamed
651422309 (TLID:144445516), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 651422309
(TLID:144445516) to Unnamed 651422310 (TLID:144445478), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 651422310 (TLID:144445478) to Warm Crk, and proceeding
westerly along Warm Crk to Unnamed 651422160 (TLID:144443737), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 651422160 (TLID:144443737) to Unnamed 651422159 (TLID:
144442954), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 651422159 (TLID:144442954) to
Unnamed 651422157 (TLID:144442923), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
651422157 (TLID:144442923) to Unnamed 651644128 (TLID:144443128), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651644128 (TLID:144443128) to Unnamed
651422023 (TLID:144443619), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651422023
(TLID:144443619) to Pacific St, and proceeding westerly along Pacific St to N
Sterling Ave, and proceeding northerly along N Sterling Ave to E Highland Ave,
and proceeding westerly along E Highland Ave to Unnamed 624343032 (TLID:
144372895), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 624343032 (TLID:144372895)
to Unnamed 624343033 (TLID:144372881), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
624343033 (TLID:144372881) to E 19th St, and proceeding westerly along E 19th
St to Unnamed 144965024 (TLID:144372759), and proceeding southerly along
Unnamed 144965024 (TLID:144372759) to Suzanne Ln, and proceeding northerly
along Suzanne Ln to Unnamed 647111743 (TLID:144372795), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 647111743 (TLID:144372795) to Unnamed 647111739 (TLID:
144372821), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647111739 (TLID:144372821)
to Unnamed 644210904 (TLID:144372688), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
644210904 (TLID:144372688) to Elmwood Rd, and proceeding southerly along
Elmwood Rd to Unnamed 614533436 (TLID:144372580), and proceeding westerly along
Unnamed 614533436 (TLID:144372580) to del Rosa Ave, and proceeding westerly
along del Rosa Ave to del Rosa Dr, and proceeding northerly along del Rosa Dr
to N del Rosa Ave, and proceeding northerly along N del Rosa Ave to Unnamed
647111847 (TLID:144370953), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647111847
(TLID:144370953) to Unnamed 647111848 (TLID:144370283), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 647111848 (TLID:144370283) to Unnamed 647111844 (TLID:
144370238), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647111844 (TLID:144370238) to
Monte Vista Dr, and proceeding southerly along Monte Vista Dr to Unnamed
629791001 (TLID:144369711), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 629791001
(TLID:144369711) to Unnamed 647989650 (TLID:144369652), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 647989650 (TLID:144369652) to 17th St, and proceeding
easterly along 17th St to Unnamed 647112270 (TLID:144370328), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 647112270 (TLID:144370328) to Pacific St, and
proceeding easterly along Pacific St to Dwight Way, and proceeding southerly
along Dwight Way to Unnamed 144656144 (TLID:144369607), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 144656144 (TLID:144369607) to Pacific St, and
proceeding westerly along Pacific St to Unnamed 647130057 (TLID:144369589), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647130057 (TLID:144369589) to Unnamed
647130058 (TLID:144369453), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647130058
(TLID:144369453) to Conejo Dr, and proceeding southerly along Conejo Dr to
Pacific St, and proceeding westerly along Pacific St to Perris Hill Park Rd,
and proceeding southerly along Perris Hill Park Rd to East Twin Crk, and
proceeding southerly along East Twin Crk to Twin Creek Dr, and proceeding
southerly along Twin Creek Dr to East Twin Crk, and proceeding southerly along
East Twin Crk to E Base Line St, and proceeding westerly along E Base Line St
to N Myrtle Dr, and proceeding westerly along N Myrtle Dr to E Base Line St,
and proceeding westerly along E Base Line St to N Wall Ave, and proceeding
westerly along N Wall Ave to E Base Line St, and proceeding westerly along E
Base Line St to W Base Line St, and proceeding westerly along W Base Line St to
W Baseline Rd, and proceeding westerly along W Baseline Rd to W Baseline St,
and proceeding westerly along W Baseline St to W Base Line St, and proceeding
westerly along W Base Line St to I-215, and proceeding northerly along I-215 to
Unnamed 619660624 (TLID:144147518), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
619660624 (TLID:144147518) to I-215, and proceeding northerly along I-215 to
Foothill Fwy, and proceeding easterly along Foothill Fwy to Unnamed 614800425
(TLID:144179487), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 614800425 (TLID:
144179487) to Foothill Fwy, and proceeding easterly along Foothill Fwy to the
point of beginning.
(Ord. MC-1376, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. MC-1567, passed 12-15-2021)
§ 1.16.040 THIRD WARD.
   The region bounded and described as follows:
   (A)   Beginning at the point of intersection of N Mount Vernon Ave and W 4th
St, and proceeding southerly along N Mount Vernon Ave to Burlington Northern
Santa Fe Rlwy, and proceeding southerly along Burlington Northern Santa Fe Rlwy
to N Mount Vernon Ave, and proceeding southerly along N Mount Vernon Ave to W
Rialto Ave, and proceeding easterly along W Rialto Ave to E Rialto Ave, and
proceeding easterly along E Rialto Ave to S Allen St, and proceeding southerly
along S Allen St to E Mill St, and proceeding easterly along E Mill St to
Unnamed 144659622 (TLID:144344799), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
144659622 (TLID:144344799) to E Mill St, and proceeding easterly along E Mill
St to E Mill Oh, and proceeding easterly along E Mill Oh to E Mill St, and
proceeding easterly along E Mill St to S Tippecanoe Ave, and proceeding
southerly along S Tippecanoe Ave to Unnamed 651716836 (TLID:144350825), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 651716836 (TLID:144350825) to Unnamed
616550910 (TLID:144352127), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 616550910
(TLID:144352127) to Burlington Northern Santa Fe Rlwy, and proceeding northerly
along Burlington Northern Santa Fe Rlwy to Mountain View Ave, and proceeding
southerly along Mountain View Ave to San Bernardino Ave, and proceeding
easterly along San Bernardino Ave to Mountain View Ave, and proceeding
southerly along Mountain View Ave to W Lugonia Ave, and proceeding southerly
along W Lugonia Ave to Mountain View Ave, and proceeding southerly along
Mountain View Ave to Unnamed 647992142 (TLID:142805890), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 647992142 (TLID:142805890) to I-10, and proceeding
westerly along I-10 to Gage Cnl, and proceeding southerly along Gage Cnl to
Unnamed 144724571 (TLID:142738286), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
144724571 (TLID:142738286) to Gage Cnl, and proceeding westerly along Gage Cnl
to Barton Rd N, and proceeding westerly along Barton Rd N to Unnamed 644158897
(TLID:142721177), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 644158897 (TLID:
142721177) to Unnamed 632542621 (TLID:142721133), and proceeding westerly along
Unnamed 632542621 (TLID:142721133) to Unnamed 144702102 (TLID:142720673), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144702102 (TLID:142720673) to S Waterman Ave,
and proceeding westerly along S Waterman Ave to E Washington St N, and
proceeding westerly along E Washington St N to Unnamed 652335447 (TLID:
142717619), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 652335447 (TLID:142717619) to
Unnamed 652335450 (TLID:142717593), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
652335450 (TLID:142717593) to Unnamed 652335449 (TLID:142717077), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 652335449 (TLID:142717077) to E Washington St
N, and proceeding westerly along E Washington St N to S Hunts Ln, and
proceeding westerly along S Hunts Ln to Unnamed 614813576 (TLID:142723653), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 614813576 (TLID:142723653) to Unnamed
635923807 (TLID:142723109), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 635923807
(TLID:142723109) to Unnamed 635923808 (TLID:142723132), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 635923808 (TLID:142723132) to Unnamed 650412308 (TLID:142713350),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 650412308 (TLID:142713350) to Unnamed
650412307 (TLID:142712889), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 650412307
(TLID:142712889) to Unnamed 644366987 (TLID:142713486), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 644366987 (TLID:142713486) to Unnamed 145227331 (TLID:
142713634), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 145227331 (TLID:142713634)
to Unnamed 144659235 (TLID:142713687), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
144659235 (TLID:142713687) to E Fairway Dr, and proceeding westerly along E
Fairway Dr to S Auto Plaza Dr, and proceeding northerly along S Auto Plaza Dr
to Unnamed 647988155 (TLID:142710928), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
647988155 (TLID:142710928) to Unnamed 644424929 (TLID:142710849), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 644424929 (TLID:142710849) to Unnamed
616550868 (TLID:142710856), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 616550868
(TLID:142710856) to Unnamed 616550867 (TLID:142710881), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 616550867 (TLID:142710881) to Unnamed 629797992 (TLID:
142710887), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 629797992 (TLID:142710887)
to Unnamed 632550573 (TLID:142710893), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
632550573 (TLID:142710893) to Unnamed 632550575 (TLID:142710056), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 632550575 (TLID:142710056) to Unnamed
632550575 (TLID:142709984), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 632550575
(TLID:142709984) to E Scenic Dr, and proceeding easterly along E Scenic Dr to
Unnamed 651415882 (TLID:142711353), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
651415882 (TLID:142711353) to Unnamed 651415879 (TLID:142711343), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651415879 (TLID:142711343) to Unnamed
651415876 (TLID:142711377), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651415876
(TLID:142711377) to Unnamed 651415873 (TLID:142711405), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 651415873 (TLID:142711405) to Unnamed 651415835 (TLID:
142711420), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651415835 (TLID:142711420)
to Unnamed 651415836 (TLID:142711536), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
651415836 (TLID:142711536) to Unnamed 650412358 (TLID:142711545), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 650412358 (TLID:142711545) to Unnamed
651643445 (TLID:142711487), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651643445
(TLID:l427 l1487) to Unnamed 144724517 (TLID:142711497), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 144724517 (TLID:142711497) to Unnamed 650412403 (TLID:
142710833), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 650412403 (TLID:142710833)
to Unnamed 650412404 (TLID:144295833), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
650412404 (TLID:144295833) to Inland Center Dr, and proceeding northerly along
Inland Center Dr to Unnamed 650412437 (TLID:144295827), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 650412437 (TLID:144295827) to Unnamed 632542871 (TLID:
144295390), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 632542871 (TLID:144295390)
to Unnamed 644362615 (TLID:144295371), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
644362615 (TLID:144295371) to Unnamed 644362615 (TLID:144295923), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 644362615 (TLID:144295923) to E Grant Ave,
and proceeding westerly along E Grant Ave to N Mount Vernon Ave, and proceeding
northerly along N Mount Vernon Ave to E Johnston St, and proceeding westerly
along E Johnston St to Bordwell Ave, and proceeding northerly along Bordwell
Ave to Unnamed 145226507 (TLID:144117025), and proceeding northerly along
Unnamed 145226507 (TLID:144117025) to Unnamed 632556003 (TLID:144117031), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 632556003 (TLID:144117031) to Unnamed
632556013 (TLID:144117105), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 632556013
(TLID:144117105) to Unnamed 642197022 (TLID:144117019), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 642197022 (TLID:144117019) to Unnamed 642197021 (TLID:144117123),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 642197021 (TLID:144117123) to Unnamed
632555787 (TLID:144117144), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 632555787
(TLID:144117144) to Unnamed 632555446 (TLID:144116923), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 632555446 (TLID:144116923) to Unnamed 632555497 (TLID:
144116911), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 632555497 (TLID:144116911)
to Unnamed 632555529 (TLID:144116904), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
632555529 (TLID:144116904) to Unnamed 632556815 (TLID:144116600), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 632556815 (TLID:144116600) to Unnamed
632556814 (TLID:144116295), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 632556814
(TLID:144116295) to Unnamed 632556811 (TLID:144116289), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 632556811 (TLID:144116289) to Unnamed 632556808 (TLID:144116282),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 632556808 (TLID:144116282) to Unnamed
632556805 (TLID:144116205), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 632556805
(TLID:144116205) to Unnamed 644218551 (TLID:144116181), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 644218551 (TLID:144116181) to Unnamed 632556799 (TLID:144115747),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 632556799 (TLID:144115747) to W Mill St,
and proceeding westerly along W Mill St to Unnamed 651415756 (TLID:144115570),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651415756 (TLID:144115570) to Unnamed
651415755 (TLID:144115577), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651415755
(TLID:144115577) to Unnamed 653243684 (TLID:144115802), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 653243684 (TLID:144115802) to Unnamed 651415728 (TLID:
144120233), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 651415728 (TLID:144120233) to
Unnamed 650412669 (TLID:144112121), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
650412669 (TLID:144112121) to Unnamed 650412668 (TLID:144107838), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 650412668 (TLID:144107838) to Unnamed
651415628 (TLID:144107488), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 651415628
(TLID:144107488) to Unnamed 651415631 (TLID:144107423), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 651415631 (TLID:144107423) to Unnamed 651415634 (TLID:144107390),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 651415634 (TLID:144107390) to Unnamed
652335297 (TLID:144106654), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 652335297
(TLID:144106654) to Unnamed 652335299 (TLID:144106521), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 652335299 (TLID:144106521) to Unnamed 651415686 (TLID:144110384),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651415686 (TLID:144110384) to Unnamed
651415685 (TLID:144110354), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 651415685
(TLID:144110354) to N Rancho Ave, and proceeding southerly along N Rancho Ave
to Unnamed 651415388 (TLID:144104856), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
651415388 (TLID:144104856) to Unnamed 651415370 (TLID:144104397), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 651415370 (TLID:144104397) to W Mill St, and
proceeding westerly along W Mill St to Unnamed 651416191 (TLID:144103581), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 651416191 (TLID:144103581) to Unnamed
651416192 (TLID:144103482), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 651416192
(TLID:144103482) to Unnamed 651416228 (TLID:144103435), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 651416228 (TLID:144103435) to Unnamed 632562865 (TLID:
144103402), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 632562865 (TLID:144103402)
to Unnamed 632562862 (TLID:144102833), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
632562862 (TLID:144102833) to Unnamed 650412498 (TLID:144070047), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 650412498 (TLID:144070047) to Unnamed
650714955 (TLID:144069669), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 650714955
(TLID:144069669) to Burlington Northern Santa Fe Rlwy, and proceeding southerly
along Burlington Northern Santa Fe Rlwy to Unnamed 650412489 (TLID:144069564),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 650412489 (TLID:144069564) to Unnamed
650412490 (TLID:144069458), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 650412490
(TLID:144069458) to Unnamed 144988708 (TLID:144069380), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 144988708 (TLID:144069380) to Unnamed 144988707 (TLID:144068621),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144988707 (TLID:144068621) to Unnamed
614892559 (TLID:144068188), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 614892559
(TLID:144068188) to W Randall Ave, and proceeding westerly along W Randall Ave
to Unnamed 651069439 (TLID:144055532), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
651069439 (TLID:144055532) to Unnamed 145000991 (TLID:144056846), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 145000991 (TLID:144056846) to Unnamed
145220050 (TLID:144057000), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 145220050
(TLID:144057000) to Unnamed 145000995 (TLID:144066595), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 145000995 (TLID:144066595) to S Eucalyptus Ave, and proceeding
northerly along S Eucalyptus Ave to E Rialto Ave, and proceeding easterly along
E Rialto Ave to W Rialto Ave, and proceeding easterly along W Rialto Ave to
Burlington Northern Santa Fe Rlwy, and proceeding northerly along Burlington
Northern Santa Fe Rlwy to Lytle Creek Chnnl, and proceeding northerly along
Lytle Creek Chnnl to W Foothill Blvd, and proceeding easterly along W Foothill
Blvd to W 4th St, and proceeding easterly along W 4th St to the point of
beginning;
   (B)   Except for beginning at the point of intersection of Unnamed 651661360
(TLID:142759027) and E Cooley Ave, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
651661360 (TLID:142759027) to E Cooley Ave, and proceeding westerly along E
Cooley Ave to the point of beginning;
   (C)   Except for beginning at the point of intersection of Unnamed 650801061
(TLID:142758124) and Unnamed 650801053 (TLID:142758144), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 650801061 (TLID:142758124) to Davidson St, and
proceeding easterly along Davidson St to Curtis St, and proceeding northerly
along Curtis St to Unnamed 650801053 (TLID:142758144), and proceeding northerly
along Unnamed 650801053 (TLID:142758144) to the point of beginning;
   (D)   Except for beginning at the point of intersection of S Richardson St
and E Cooley Ave, and proceeding southerly along S Richardson St to Unnamed
144688763 (TLID:142758975), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144688763
(TLID:142758975) to E Cooley Ave, and proceeding westerly along E Cooley Ave to
the point of beginning; and
   (E)   Except for beginning at the point of intersection of E Cooley Ave and
Unnamed 651426691 (TLID:142759340), and proceeding westerly along E Cooley Ave
to Unnamed 651426749 (TLID:142759302), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
651426749 (TLID:142759302) to Unnamed 651426691 (TLID:142759327), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651426691 (TLID:142759327) to Unnamed
651426691 (TLID:142759340), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 651426691
(TLID:142759340) to the point of beginning.
(Ord. MC-1376, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. MC-1567, passed 12-15-2021)
§ 1.16.050 FOURTH WARD.
   The region bounded and described as follows: beginning at the point of
intersection of Unnamed 636041398 (TLID:144528427) and Unnamed 636041611 (TLID:
144528417), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 636041398 (TLID:144528427)
to Unnamed 647153502 (TLID:144410016), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
647153502 (TLID:144410016) to Unnamed 647153503 (TLID:144410010), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647153503 (TLID:144410010) to Unnamed
647153499 (TLID:144410049), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647153499
(TLID:144410049) to Unnamed 629791069 (TLID:144410890), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 629791069 (TLID:144410890) to Unnamed 647153581 (TLID:144410919),
and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647153581 (TLID:144410919) to Unnamed
647153582 (TLID:144410943), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647153582
(TLID:144410943) to Old Waterman Canyon Rd, and proceeding southerly along Old
Waterman Canyon Rd to Unnamed 647153613 (TLID:144410967), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 647153613 (TLID:144410967) to Unnamed 647153614 (TLID:
144434140), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647153614 (TLID:144434140)
to Unnamed 647153812 (TLID:144434172), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
647153812 (TLID:144434172) to Unnamed 647153808 (TLID:144434647), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647153808 (TLID:144434647) to Unnamed
647992326 (TLID:144435120), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647992326
(TLID:144435120) to Unnamed 636041635 (TLID:144435134), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 636041635 (TLID:144435134) to Unnamed 636041638 (TLID:
144435496), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 636041638 (TLID:144435496) to
Unnamed 647990263 (TLID:144514947), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
647990263 (TLID:144514947) to Unnamed 648096410 (TLID:144515523), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 648096410 (TLID:144515523) to Unnamed
647154727 (TLID:144516195), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647154727
(TLID:144516195) to Unnamed 648096392 (TLID:144516174), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 648096392 (TLID:144516174) to Unnamed 647154723 (TLID:
144514990), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647154723 (TLID:144514990) to
Unnamed 647154720 (TLID:144514669), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
647154720 (TLID:144514669) to Daley Canyon Trk Tri, and proceeding westerly
along Daley Canyon Trk Tri to Unnamed 647154713 (TLID:144433880), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647154713 (TLID:144433880) to Unnamed
647989318 (TLID:144433861), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647989318
(TLID:144433861) to Unnamed 647155158 (TLID:144433743), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 647155158 (TLID:144433743) to Unnamed 647990959 (TLID:
144433841), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647990959 (TLID:144433841) to
Unnamed 647155301 (TLID:144419732), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
647155301 (TLID:144419732) to Unnamed 648352983 (TLID:144419667), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 648352983 (TLID:144419667) to Unnamed
648352982 (TLID:144418708), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 648352982
(TLID:144418708) to Unnamed 647155554 (TLID:144418727), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 647155554 (TLID:144418727) to Harrison Canyon Rd, and proceeding
southerly along Harrison Canyon Rd to E 40th St, and proceeding easterly along
E 40th St to Unnamed 647155910 (TLID:144428554), and proceeding northerly along
Unnamed 647155910 (TLID:144428554) to Unnamed 144654375 (TLID:144429014), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144654375 (TLID:144429014) to Unnamed
144660396 (TLID:144430659), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144660396
(TLID:144430659) to Unnamed 647990957 (TLID:144431102), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 647990957 (TLID:144431102) to Unnamed 647156455 (TLID:144432490),
and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647156455 (TLID:144432490) to Unnamed
647156454 (TLID:144432512), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647156454
(TLID:144432512) to Unnamed 647156117 (TLID:144432895), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 647156117 (TLID:144432895) to Unnamed 647156121 (TLID:144506807),
and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647156121 (TLID:144506807) to Sand
Canyon Truck Tri, and proceeding southerly along Sand Canyon Truck Tri to N
Sand Canyon Truck Tri, and proceeding southerly along N Sand Canyon Truck Tri
to Daley Canyon Rd, and proceeding southerly along Daley Canyon Rd to Unnamed
647156131 (TLID:144506727), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647156131
(TLID:144506727) to Unnamed 647156129 (TLID:144506917), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 647156129 (TILID:144506917) to Unnamed 614822709 (TLID:
144507472), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 614822709 (TLID:144507472) to
Unnamed 614822670 (TLID:144507483), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
614822670 (TLID:144507483) to Unnamed 614822669 (TLID:144514146), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 614822669 (TLID:144514146) to Unnamed
144660551 (TLID:144514117), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 144660551
(TLID:144514117) to Unnamed 144981042 (TLID:144510801), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 144981042 (TLID:144510801) to Unnamed 629790979 (TLID:
144510795), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 629790979 (TLID:144510795)
to Unnamed 629790978 (TLID:144510762), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
629790978 (TLID:144510762) to Unnamed 144963697 (TLID:144509250), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 144963697 (TLID:144509250) to N Victoria
Ave, and proceeding southerly along N Victoria Ave to Unnamed 614877102 (TLID:
144509200), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 614877102 (TLID:144509200)
to Unnamed 640664213 (TILID:144509176), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
640664213 (TLID:144509176) to Unnamed 640664214 (TLID:144508565), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 640664214 (TLID:144508565) to Unnamed
640664257 (TLID:144509278), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 640664257
(TLID:144509278) to Unnamed 640664436 (TLID:144509973), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 640664436 (TLID:144509973) to Unnamed 640664438 (TLID:144510052),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 640664438 (TLID:144510052) to Unnamed
647127662 (TLID:144510137), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647127662
(TLID:144510137) to Unnamed 653061598 (TLID:144510524), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 653061598 (TLID:144510524) to Unnamed 647990949 (TLID:
144510598), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647990949 (TLID:144510598) to
Unnamed 640664269 (TLID:144512162), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
640664269 (TLID:144512162) to Unnamed 640664268 (TLID:144512362), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 640664268 (TLID:144512362) to Unnamed
623916055 (TLID:144512690), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 623916055
(TLID:144512690) to Unnamed 623916054 (TLID:144513879), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 623916054 (TLID:144513879) to Unnamed 144984702 (TLID:144518342),
and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144984702 (TLID:144518342) to Unnamed
144963690 (TLID:144518353), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144963690
(TLID:144518353) to Unnamed 642072281 (TLID:144518672), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 642072281 (TLID:144518672) to Unnamed 642072282 (TLID:
144518937), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 642072282 (TLID:144518937)
to Unnamed 614872263 (TLID:144518974), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
614872263 (TLID:144518974) to Unnamed 614872262 (TLID:144519028), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 614872262 (TLID:144519028) to Unnamed
144963688 (TLID:144519062), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 144963688
(TLID:144519062) to Unnamed 144963687 (TLID:144519050), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 144963687 (TLID:144519050) to Unnamed 144963686 (TLID:144519196),
and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144963686 (TLID:144519196) to Unnamed
653171362 (TLID:144520004), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 653171362
(TLID:144520004) to Unnamed 145191878 (TLID:144520166), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 145191878 (TLID:144520166) to Unnamed 145199453 (TLID:144520224),
and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 145199453 (TLID:144520224) to Unnamed
145199452 (TLID:144520239), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 145199452
(TLID:144520239) to Unnamed 650413311 (TLID:145489601), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 650413311 (TLID:145489601) to Unnamed 650413310 (TLID:
145474137), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 650413310 (TLID:145474137)
to Unnamed 614822552 (TLID:145474143), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
614822552 (TLID:145474143) to Unnamed 647989145 (TLID:145475629), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647989145 (TLID:145475629) to Unnamed
145226750 (TLID:145475672), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 145226750
(TLID:145475672) to Unnamed 651424018 (TLID:145475588), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 651424018 (TLID:145475588) to Unnamed 651424021 (TLID:145474114),
and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 651424021 (TLID:145474114) to Emmerton
Ln, and proceeding southerly along Emmerton Ln to Unnamed 651424037 (TLID:
145473604), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 651424037 (TLID:145473604) to
Unnamed 651424033 (TLID:145473579), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
651424033 (TLID:145473579) to Unnamed 651706971 (TLID:145473551), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 651706971 (TLID:145473551) to Unnamed
651425173 (TLID:145472554), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 651425173
(TLID:145472554) to Unnamed 651425248 (TLID:145472498), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 651425248 (TLID:145472498) to Arroyo Vista Dr, and proceeding
westerly along Arroyo Vista Dr to N Orchard Rd, and proceeding southerly along
N Orchard Rd to Terrace Dr, and proceeding easterly along Terrace Dr to Unnamed
145000981 (TLID:144498256), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 145000981
(TLID:144498256) to Fairway Ln, and proceeding westerly along Fairway Ln to
Unnamed 145226648 (TLID:144498200), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
145226648 (TLID:144498200) to Unnamed 145226648 (TLID:144497877), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 145226648 (TLID:144497877) to Highland Ave,
and proceeding westerly along Highland Ave to Unnamed 144718236 (TLID:
144497467), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144718236 (TLID:144497467)
to Highland Ave, and proceeding westerly along Highland Ave to Unnamed
614877255 (TLID:144494253), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 614877255
(TLID:144494253) to Highland Ave, and proceeding westerly along Highland Ave to
Unnamed 651423907 (TLID:144484088), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
651423907 (TLID:144484088) to Atlantic Ave, and proceeding easterly along
Atlantic Ave to Unnamed 636146884 (TLID:144484989), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 636146884 (TLID:144484989) to Unnamed 636146885 (TLID:144485030),
and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 636146885 (TLID:144485030) to Unnamed
644267012 (TLID:144485513), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 644267012
(TLID:144485513) to N Boulder Ave, and proceeding southerly along N Boulder Ave
to Pacific St, and proceeding westerly along Pacific St to La Praix St, and
proceeding southerly along La Praix St to Unnamed 644362282 (TLID:144478488),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 644362282 (TLID:144478488) to Unnamed
144984979 (TLID:144483271), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144984979
(TLID:144483271) to Unnamed 144984978 (TLID:144483259), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 144984978 (TLID:144483259) to Unnamed 614885221 (TLID:144481002),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 614885221 (TLID:144481002) to Unnamed
614885220 (TLID:144480971), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 614885220
(TLID:144480971) to Unnamed 614882869 (TLID:144480962), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 614882869 (TLID:144480962) to State Hwy 30 S, and proceeding
westerly along State Hwy 30 S to Pacific St, and proceeding westerly along
Pacific St to Unnamed 651636760 (TLID:144479750), and proceeding northerly
along Unnamed 651636760 (TLID:144479750) to N Palm Ave, and proceeding
northerly along N Palm Ave to E Atlantic Ave, and proceeding westerly along E
Atlantic Ave to Unnamed 614882678 (TLID:144462805), and proceeding southerly
along Unnamed 614882678 (TLID:144462805) to Orange St, and proceeding southerly
along Orange St to Unnamed 653186793 (TLID:144462255), and proceeding southerly
along Unnamed 653186793 (TLID:144462255) to Orange St, and proceeding southerly
along Orange St to E Clifton Ave, and proceeding easterly along E Clifton Ave
to Unnamed 651423771 (TLID:144459818), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
651423771 (TLID:144459818) to Unnamed 651666821 (TLID:144459797), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 651666821 (TLID:144459797) to Unnamed
145000408 (TLID:144474290), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 145000408
(TLID:144474290) to Unnamed 145000405 (TLID:144474366), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 145000405 (TLID:144474366) to Palm Ave, and proceeding southerly
along Palm Ave to Unnamed 651679172 (TLID:144474403), and proceeding southerly
along Unnamed 651679172 (TLID:144474403) to Palm Ave, and proceeding southerly
along Palm Ave to Unnamed 651703677 (TLID:144474105), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 651703677 (TLID:144474105) to Unnamed 650713852 (TLID:144459100),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 650713852 (TLID:144459100) to Cole Ave,
and proceeding northerly along Cole Ave to 14th St, and proceeding westerly
along 14th St to Unnamed 651707140 (TLID:144459286), and proceeding northerly
along Unnamed 651707140 (TLID:144459286) to Unnamed 651423561 (TLID:144459376),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651423561 (TLID:144459376) to Fisher St,
and proceeding westerly along Fisher St to Orange St, and proceeding northerly
along Orange St to Unnamed 145000416 (TLID:144458553), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 145000416 (TLID:144458553) to Central Ave, and proceeding
northerly along Central Ave to Mansfield St, and proceeding westerly along
Mansfield St to Unnamed 144689058 (TLID:144461600), and proceeding northerly
along Unnamed 144689058 (TLID:144461600) to Pacific St, and proceeding westerly
along Pacific St to Unnamed 651423212 (TLID:144460577), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 651423212 (TLID:144460577) to Unnamed 651423187 (TLID:
144460610), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651423187 (TLID:144460610)
to Unnamed 651423182 (TLID:144460781), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
651423182 (TLID:144460781) to Highland Ave, and proceeding westerly along
Highland Ave to N Victoria Ave, and proceeding northerly along N Victoria Ave
to Unnamed 144733354 (TLID:144460864), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
144733354 (TLID:144460864) to Sand Crk, and proceeding northerly along Sand Crk
to Date St E, and proceeding westerly along Date St E to Unnamed 144661044
(TLID:144453147), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144661044 (TLID:
144453147) to Unnamed 644392798 (TLID:144453247), and proceeding northerly
along Unnamed 644392798 (TLID:144453247) to Unnamed 144661011 (TLID:144453315),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144661011 (TLID:144453315) to Unnamed
144661000 (TLID:144504692), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144661000
(TLID:144504692) to Unnamed 144661000 (TLID:144504781), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 144661000 (TLID:144504781) to E Lynwood Dr, and proceeding
westerly along E Lynwood Dr to Unnamed 144660962 (TLID:144503552), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144660962 (TLID:144503552) to Arden Ave, and
proceeding southerly along Arden Ave to E Lynwood Dr, and proceeding westerly
along E Lynwood Dr to Unnamed 647128114 (TLID:144500977), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 647128114 (TLID:144500977) to Unnamed 647128111 (TLID:
144500942), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647128111 (TLID:144500942) to
Unnamed 647128108 (TLID:144500860), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
647128108 (TLID:144500860) to Unnamed 647128105 (TLID:144500841), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647128105 (TLID:144500841) to Unnamed
647128101 (TLID:144500822), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647128101
(TLID:144500822) to E Lynwood Dr, and proceeding westerly along E Lynwood Dr to
Unnamed 647990540 (TLID:144425723), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
647990540 (TLID:144425723) to Marshall Blvd E, and proceeding westerly along
Marshall Blvd E to E Marshall Blvd, and proceeding westerly along E Marshall
Blvd to Unnamed 647110406 (TLID:144425555), and proceeding northerly along
Unnamed 647110406 (TLID:144425555) to Unnamed 647110471 (TLID:144426116), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647110471 (TLID:144426116) to Bonnie St, and
proceeding southerly along Bonnie St to Edgemont Dr, and proceeding easterly
along Edgemont Dr to Unnamed 144660617 (TLID:144426143), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 144660617 (TLID:144426143) to Marshall Blvd E, and
proceeding easterly along Marshall Blvd E to Unnamed 144660987 (TLID:
144505428), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144660987 (TLID:144505428)
to Unnamed 144660592 (TLID:144505475), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
144660592 (TLID:144505475) to Unnamed 144660589 (TLID:144505525), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144660589 (TLID:144505525) to Piedmont Dr,
and proceeding westerly along Piedmont Dr to E Piedmont Dr, and proceeding
westerly along E Piedmont Dr to Piedmont Dr, and proceeding westerly along
Piedmont Dr to Arden Ave, and proceeding southerly along Arden Ave to Unnamed
647127951 (TLID:144504047), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647127951
(TLID:144504047) to Unnamed 647127947 (TLID:144501700), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 647127947 (TLID:144501700) to Unnamed 144660544 (TLID:144501657),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144660544 (TLID:144501657) to Unnamed
647127883 (TLID:144501612), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647127883
(TLID:144501612) to Unnamed 647127884 (TLID:144501468), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 647127884 (TLID:144501468) to Unnamed 647127881 (TLID:144503031),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647127881 (TLID:144503031) to Foothill
Dr, and proceeding westerly along Foothill Dr to N del Rosa Ave, and proceeding
southerly along N del Rosa Ave to Eureka St, and proceeding easterly along
Eureka St to Unnamed 647110375 (TLID:144425106), and proceeding southerly along
Unnamed 647110375 (TLID:144425106) to Unnamed 647110379 (TLID:144425059), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647110379 (TLID:144425059) to E Marshall
Blvd, and proceeding westerly along E Marshall Blvd to N del Rosa Ave, and
proceeding southerly along N del Rosa Ave to E Lynwood Dr, and proceeding
westerly along E Lynwood Dr to N Mountain Ave, and proceeding northerly along N
Mountain Ave to Mountain Ave N, and proceeding northerly along Mountain Ave N
to Unnamed 145000973 (TLID:144420900), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
145000973 (TLID:144420900) to N Fairfax Dr, and proceeding northerly along N
Fairfax Dr to Unnamed 144654540 (TLID:144420912), and proceeding easterly along
Unnamed 144654540 (TLID:144420912) to Mountain Ave N, and proceeding northerly
along Mountain Ave N to Unnamed 144733464 (TLID:144420979), and proceeding
westerly along Unnamed 144733464 (TLID:144420979) to Unnamed 144654535 (TLID:
144420924), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144654535 (TLID:144420924) to
Unnamed 144654501 (TLID:144420479), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
144654501 (TLID:144420479) to Unnamed 144654492 (TLID:144421872), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144654492 (TLID:144421872) to E 35th St, and
proceeding westerly along E 35th St to Modesto Dr, and proceeding northerly
along Modesto Dr to Unnamed 647109840 (TLID:144422294), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 647109840 (TLID:144422294) to Conejo Dr, and proceeding easterly
along Conejo Dr to Ferndale Ave, and proceeding northerly along Ferndale Ave to
Unnamed 647109930 (TLID:144422517), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
647109930 (TLID:144422517) to Mountain Ave N, and proceeding northerly along
Mountain Ave N to Unnamed 647109745 (TLID:144423316), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 647109745 (TLID:144423316) to Unnamed 647109746 (TLID:144423297),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647109746 (TLID:144423297) to Ferndale
Ave, and proceeding northerly along Ferndale Ave to E Echo Dr, and proceeding
westerly along E Echo Dr to Unnamed 144654435 (TLID:144428216), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 144654435 (TLID:144428216) to E 39th St, and proceeding
westerly along E 39th St to Unnamed 144654425 (TLID:144416370), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 144654425 (TLID:144416370) to Unnamed 144654438 (TLID:
144416273), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 144654438 (TLID:144416273)
to Unnamed 647110171 (TLID:144415556), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
647110171 (TLID:144415556) to Unnamed 647110170 (TLID:144415459), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647110170 (TLID:144415459) to Unnamed
647110166 (TLID:144415423), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647110166
(TLID:144415423) to Unnamed 144654333 (TLID:144414934), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 144654333 (TLID:144414934) to Unnamed 144654333 (TLID:144414827),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144654333 (TLID:144414827) to Harrison
St N, and proceeding northerly along Harrison St N to E 40th St, and proceeding
westerly along E 40th St to W 40th St, and proceeding westerly along W 40th St
to N Electric Ave, and proceeding southerly along N Electric Ave to N Mountain
View Ave, and proceeding southerly along N Mountain View Ave to W Thompson Pl,
and proceeding westerly along W Thompson Pl to N Arrowhead Ave, and proceeding
westerly along N Arrowhead Ave to W Kendall Dr, and proceeding westerly along W
Kendall Dr to W 40th St, and proceeding easterly along W 40th St to Unnamed
144653650 (TLID:144386947), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144653650
(TLID:144386947) to Johnson St, and proceeding southerly along Johnson St to
Unnamed 144653715 (TLID:144386967), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
144653715 (TLID:144386967) to Unnamed 144653723 (TLID:144396685), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144653723 (TLID:144396685) to Unnamed
647987739 (TLID:144396771), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647987739
(TLID:144396771) to Unnamed 144978728 (TLID:144396794), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 144978728 (TLID:144396794) to N Electric Ave, and proceeding
northerly along N Electric Ave to Unnamed 144978731 (TLID:144396912), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144978731 (TLID:144396912) to Unnamed
145220160 (TLID:144396857), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 145220160
(TLID:144396857) to W 41st St, and proceeding westerly along W 41st St to NF
St, and proceeding northerly along N F St to W 48th St, and proceeding westerly
along W 48th St to N E St, and proceeding southerly along NE St to Unnamed
145230656 (TLID:144387323), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 145230656
(TLID:144387323) to Unnamed 144651481 (TLID:144387354), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 144651481 (TLID:144387354) to NH St, and proceeding northerly
along N H St to Unnamed 144651474 (TLID:144387432), and proceeding northerly
along Unnamed 144651474 (TLID:144387432) to NH St, and proceeding northerly
along N H St to W Hill Dr, and proceeding westerly along W Hill Dr to Unnamed
636817303 (TLID:144386191), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 636817303
(TLID:144386191) to Unnamed 636817301 (TLID:144386131), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 636817301 (TLID:144386131) to N 3rd Ave, and proceeding southerly
along N 3rd Ave to Unnamed 144651464 (TLID:144385803), and proceeding northerly
along Unnamed 144651464 (TLID:144385803) to W Hill Dr, and proceeding westerly
along W Hill Dr to Campus Cir, and proceeding northerly along Campus Cir to
Unnamed 144555374 (TLID:144405241), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
144555374 (TLID:144405241) to Unnamed 627217834 (TLID:144405689), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 627217834 (TLID:144405689) to Unnamed
627217833 (TLID:144405985), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 627217833
(TLID:144405985) to Unnamed 652038818 (TLID:144406422), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 652038818 (TLID:144406422) to Unnamed 652038817 (TLID:144408178),
and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 652038817 (TLID:144408178) to Unnamed
647153354 (TLID:144409221), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647153354
(TLID:144409221) to Unnamed 644251622 (TLID:144410480), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 644251622 (TLID:144410480) to Cloudland Truck Tri, and
proceeding northerly along Cloudland Truck Trl to Unnamed 636041604 (TLID:
144409550), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 636041604 (TLID:144409550)
to Unnamed 636041601 (TLID:144409696), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
636041601 (TLID:144409696) to Unnamed 636041547 (TLID:144409702), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 636041547 (TLID:144409702) to Unnamed
636041544 (TLID:144409715), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 636041544
(TLID:144409715) to Unnamed 636041611 (TLID:144528417), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 636041611 (TLID:144528417) to the point of beginning.
(Ord. MC-1376, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. MC-1567, passed 12-15-2021)
§ 1.16.060 FIFTH WARD.
   The region bounded and described as follows: beginning at the point of
intersection of Unnamed 647149986 (TLID:144253679) and Unnamed 650414396 (TLID:
144245559), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647149986 (TLID:144253679) to
Unnamed 647149929 (TLID:144253597), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
647149929 (TLID:144253597) to Unnamed 650414315 (TLID:144254092), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 650414315 (TLID:144254092) to Unnamed
647150611 (TLID:144254020), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647150611
(TLID:144254020) to Unnamed 647150610 (TLID:144252754), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 647150610 (TLID:144252754) to Unnamed 627217840 (TLID:
144252676), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 627217840 (TLID:144252676)
to Unnamed 647151185 (TLID:144252498), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
647151185 (TLID:144252498) to Unnamed 647151186 (TLID:144193248), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647151186 (TLID:144193248) to Unnamed
647150880 (TLID:144192549), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647150880
(TLID:144192549) to Unnamed 647989280 (TLID:144192688), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 647989280 (TLID:144192688) to W Frontline Rd, and
proceeding southerly along W Frontline Rd to Unnamed 647151679 (TLID:
144194747), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647151679 (TLID:144194747)
to Unnamed 144736409 (TLID:144195245), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
144736409 (TLID:144195245) to Unnamed 648098719 (TLID:144195657), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 648098719 (TLID:144195657) to Unnamed
647152267 (TLID:144194664), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647152267
(TLID:144194664) to Unnamed 647987233 (TLID:144405294), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 647987233 (TLID:144405294) to Sycamore Canyon Rd, and proceeding
easterly along Sycamore Canyon Rd to Unnamed 144555374 (TLID:144405241), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144555374 (TLID:144405241) to N Magnolia Dr,
and proceeding southerly along N Magnolia Dr to Unnamed 649794939 (TLID:
144189095), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 649794939 (TLID:144189095) to
N Magnolia Dr, and proceeding southerly along N Magnolia Dr to Unnamed
648099337 (TLID:144189055), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 648099337
(TLID:144189055) to N 4th Ave, and proceeding southerly along N 4th Ave to
Unnamed 144651454 (TLID:144384052), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
144651454 (TLID:144384052) to Unnamed 144651459 (TLID:144384431), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144651459 (TLID:144384431) to Unnamed
144651492 (TLID:144385176), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144651492
(TLID:144385176) to N 3rd Ave, and proceeding northerly along N 3rd Ave to
Unnamed 647147014 (TLID:144385217), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
647147014 (TLID:144385217) to Unnamed 614811990 (TLID:144385238), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 614811990 (TLID:144385238) to W 40th St, and
proceeding westerly along W 40th St to W Kendall Dr, and proceeding easterly
along W Kendall Dr to N E St, and proceeding southerly along N E St to W 34th
St, and proceeding westerly along W 34th St to W Edgehill Rd, and proceeding
westerly along W Edgehill Rd to N H St, and proceeding southerly along N H St
to Foothill Fwy, and proceeding westerly along Foothill Fwy to Unnamed
614800425 (TLID:144179487), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 614800425
(TLID:144179487) to Foothill Fwy, and proceeding westerly along Foothill Fwy to
I-215, and proceeding northerly along I-215 to Unnamed 616137078 (TLID:
144164517), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 616137078 (TLID:144164517) to
I-215, and proceeding northerly along I-215 to Palm Ave, and proceeding
southerly along Palm Ave to I-215, and proceeding westerly along I-215 to
Unnamed 646966385 (TLID:144211107), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
646966385 (TLID:144211107) to Unnamed 646966386 (TLID:144210138), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 646966386 (TLID:144210138) to Unnamed
646966380 (TLID:144210147), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 646966380
(TLID:144210147) to Unnamed 648084678 (TLID:144210157), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 648084678 (TLID:144210157) to Unnamed 646966374 (TLID:
144210202), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 646966374 (TLID:144210202)
to Unnamed 144972074 (TLID:144211182), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
144972074 (TLID:144211182) to Unnamed 144972073 (TLID:144211195), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144972073 (TLID:144211195) to Unnamed
649804343 (TLID:144211435), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 649804343
(TLID:144211435) to Unnamed 648353013 (TLID:144214280), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 648353013 (TLID:144214280) to Unnamed 649117253 (TLID:144214286),
and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 649117253 (TLID:144214286) to Unnamed
649117254 (TLID:144214298), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 649117254
(TLID:144214298) to Unnamed 646966781 (TLID:144214292), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 646966781 (TLID:144214292) to Cable Canyon Rd, and
proceeding westerly along Cable Canyon Rd to Unnamed 647147696 (TLID:
144214259), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647147696 (TLID:144214259)
to Unnamed 647147699 (TLID:144213509), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
647147699 (TLID:144213509) to Cable Canyon Rd, and proceeding southerly along
Cable Canyon Rd to Unnamed 647147705 (TLID:144213466), and proceeding southerly
along Unnamed 647147705 (TLID:144213466) to Unnamed 651665584 (TLID:144213401),
and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 651665584 (TLID:144213401) to Unnamed
647147783 (TLID:144213066), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647147783
(TLID:144213066) to Martin Ranch Rd, and proceeding easterly along Martin Ranch
Rd to Unnamed 647147842 (TLID:144213951), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
647147842 (TLID:144213951) to Martin Ranch Rd, and proceeding southerly along
Martin Ranch Rd to Unnamed 647147836 (TLID:144213838), and proceeding southerly
along Unnamed 647147836 (TLID:144213838) to W Meyers Rd, and proceeding
easterly along W Meyers Rd to Unnamed 644214254 (TLID:144242394), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 644214254 (TLID:144242394) to Unnamed
653159962 (TLID:144243336), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 653159962
(TLID:144243336) to Unnamed 649117671 (TLID:144243626), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 649117671 (TLID:144243626) to Unnamed 653159939 (TLID:144171637),
and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 653159939 (TLID:144171637) to Unnamed
647149084 (TLID:144171650), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 647149084
(TLID:144171650) to Unnamed 647149087 (TLID:144251197), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 647149087 (TLID:144251197) to Unnamed 647149118 (TLID:144251307),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647149118 (TLID:144251307) to Unnamed
647149152 (TLID:144251437), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647149152
(TLID:144251437) to Unnamed 647149150 (TLID:144252255), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 647149150 (TLID:144252255) to Unnamed 647149315 (TLID:
144252209), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647149315 (TLID:144252209)
to Unnamed 647149318 (TLID:144252184), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
647149318 (TLID:144252184) to Unnamed 647149321 (TLID:144251875), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647149321 (TLID:144251875) to Unnamed
647149319 (TLID:144251717), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647149319
(TLID:144251717) to Unnamed 647149411 (TLID:144251578), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 647149411 (TLID:144251578) to Unnamed 647149414 (TLID:
144251614), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647149414 (TLID:144251614)
to Unnamed 648084779 (TLID:144251620), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
648084779 (TLID:144251620) to Unnamed 648084778 (TLID:144251761), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 648084778 (TLID:144251761) to Unnamed
648084773 (TLID:144251859), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 648084773
(TLID:144251859) to Unnamed 614806133 (TLID:144251853), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 614806133 (TLID:144251853) to Unnamed 650414395 (TLID:144244684),
and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 650414395 (TLID:144244684) to Unnamed
650414396 (TLID:144245559), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 650414396
(TLID:144245559) to the point of beginning.
(Ord. MC-1376, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. MC-1567, passed 12-15-2021)
§ 1.16.070 SIXTH WARD.
   The region bounded and described as follows:
   (A)   Beginning at the point of intersection of Cajon Blvd and Unnamed
145000957 (TLID:144208699), and proceeding easterly along Cajon Blvd to Unnamed
646968126 (TLID:144050130), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 646968126
(TLID:144050130) to Unnamed 646968130 (TLID:144050113), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 646968130 (TLID:144050113) to Cajon Blvd, and proceeding
southerly along Cajon Blvd to Unnamed 145219882 (TLID:144050054), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 145219882 (TLID:144050054) to Unnamed
649804597 (TLID:144049544), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 649804597
(TLID:144049544) to Unnamed 653206407 (TLID:144049422), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 653206407 (TLID:144049422) to Unnamed 646969291 (TLID:144049477),
and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 646969291 (TLID:144049477) to Unnamed
646969290 (TLID:144049468), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 646969290
(TLID:144049468) to Unnamed 144734884 (TLID:144049450), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 144734884 (TLID:144049450) to Unnamed 646969956 (TLID:144049529),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 646969956 (TLID:144049529) to Unnamed
646969958 (TLID:144049947), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 646969958
(TLID:144049947) to Unnamed 647988277 (TLID:144049938), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 647988277 (TLID:144049938) to Unnamed 646970877 (TLID:
144049916), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 646970877 (TLID:144049916)
to Unnamed 646970877 (TLID:144049910), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
646970877 (TLID:144049910) to Unnamed 646970827 (TLID:144049980), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 646970827 (TLID:144049980) to Unnamed
144734867 (TLID:144049990), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144734867
(TLID:144049990) to Cajon Blvd, and proceeding easterly along Cajon Blvd to
Unnamed 144734862 (TLID:144158079), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
144734862 (TLID:144158079) to Unnamed 144734859 (TLID:144050284), and
proceeding southerly along Unnamed 144734859 (TLID:144050284) to Unnamed
144734854 (TLID:144049342), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 144734854
(TLID:144049342) to Unnamed 144734851 (TLID:144156540), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 144734851 (TLID:144156540) to Unnamed 144734848 (TLID:
144156881), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144734848 (TLID:144156881) to
Unnamed 144689227 (TLID:144156904), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
144689227 (TLID:144156904) to Cajon Blvd, and proceeding southerly along Cajon
Blvd to Palm Ave, and proceeding easterly along Palm Ave to Unnamed 646967168
(TLID:144157232), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 646967168 (TLID:
144157232) to Unnamed 647990358 (TLID:144157244), and proceeding northerly
along Unnamed 647990358 (TLID:144157244) to Unnamed 616133408 (TLID:144157286),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 616133408 (TLID:144157286) to Unnamed
616133408 (TLID:144157883), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 616133408
(TLID:144157883) to Palm Ave, and proceeding northerly along Palm Ave to I-215,
and proceeding easterly along I-215 to Unnamed 616137078 (TLID:144164517), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 616137078 (TLID:144164517) to I-215, and
proceeding southerly along I-215 to Foothill Fwy, and proceeding southerly
along Foothill Fwy to I-215, and proceeding southerly along I-215 to Unnamed
619660624 (TLID:144147518), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 619660624
(TLID:144147518) to I-215, and proceeding southerly along I-215 to W Base Line
St, and proceeding westerly along W Base Line St to N Mount Vernon Ave, and
proceeding southerly along N Mount Vernon Ave to W 10th St, and proceeding
southerly along W 10th St to N Mount Vernon Ave, and proceeding southerly along
N Mount Vernon Ave to W 9th St, and proceeding westerly along W 9th St to
Unnamed 614872080 (TLID:144127520), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
614872080 (TLID:144127520) to Unnamed 614872079 (TLID:144113946), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 614872079 (TLID:144113946) to Unnamed
614872079 (TLID:144113925), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 614872079
(TLID:144113925) to W Foothill Blvd, and proceeding westerly along W Foothill
Blvd to Lytle Creek Chnnl, and proceeding southerly along Lytle Creek Chnnl to
Burlington Northern Santa Fe Rlwy, and proceeding westerly along Burlington
Northern Santa Fe Rlwy to W Rialto Ave, and proceeding westerly along W Rialto
Ave to Unnamed 144645069 (TLID:144073187), and proceeding northerly along
Unnamed 144645069 (TLID:144073187) to Burlington Northern Santa Fe Rlwy, and
proceeding easterly along Burlington Northern Santa Fe Rlwy to N Pepper Ave,
and proceeding northerly along N Pepper Ave to W Foothill Blvd, and proceeding
easterly along W Foothill Blvd to Unnamed 633185396 (TLID:144074790), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 633185396 (TLID:144074790) to Unnamed
651715867 (TLID:144075319), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651715867
(TLID:144075319) to Unnamed 144645029 (TLID:144074652), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 144645029 (TLID:144074652) to N Eucalyptus Ave, and proceeding
northerly along N Eucalyptus Ave to Unnamed 644323406 (TLID:144074683), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 644323406 (TLID:144074683) to Unnamed
144965758 (TLID:144075208), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144965758
(TLID:144075208) to W 6th St, and proceeding easterly along W 6th St to N
Pepper Ave, and proceeding northerly along N Pepper Ave to Unnamed 650715800
(TLID:144092594), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 650715800 (TLID:
144092594) to N Meridian Ave, and proceeding southerly along N Meridian Ave to
Unnamed 651429062 (TLID:144096104), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
651429062 (TLID:144096104) to Unnamed 651429065 (TLID:144096863), and
proceeding easterly along Unnamed 651429065 (TLID:144096863) to Unnamed
651429068 (TLID:144096950), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 651429068
(TLID:144096950) to N Terrace Rd, and proceeding northerly along N Terrace Rd
to Unnamed 650716008 (TLID:144097579), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
650716008 (TLID:144097579) to E Base Line Rd, and proceeding westerly along E
Base Line Rd to Unnamed 651440519 (TLID:144097475), and proceeding northerly
along Unnamed 651440519 (TLID:144097475) to Unnamed 651440462 (TLID:144097532),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651440462 (TLID:144097532) to N Martin
Rd, and proceeding northerly along N Martin Rd to Unnamed 645279350 (TLID:
144094964), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 645279350 (TLID:144094964)
to Unnamed 651718434 (TLID:144097702), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
651718434 (TLID:144097702) to Unnamed 651441595 (TLID:144099017), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651441595 (TLID:144099017) to Unnamed
145000959 (TLID:144099077), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 145000959
(TLID:144099077) to Unnamed 636142382 (TLID:144099105), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 636142382 (TLID:144099105) to Unnamed 651441385 (TLID:
144099120), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 651441385 (TLID:144099120)
to Unnamed 651441356 (TLID:144099135), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
651441356 (TLID:144099135) to W Highland Ave, and proceeding easterly along W
Highland Ave to Unnamed 647000892 (TLID:144099850), and proceeding northerly
along Unnamed 647000892 (TLID:144099850) to Unnamed 647000885 (TLID:144100209),
and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647000885 (TLID:144100209) to Unnamed
647000824 (TLID:144100215), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647000824
(TLID:144100215) to Unnamed 647000821 (TLID:144100546), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 647000821 (TLID:144100546) to Unnamed 144684723 (TLID:
144100621), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144684723 (TLID:144100621)
to Mallory St, and proceeding easterly along Mallory St to Unnamed 144651556
(TLID:144100648), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144651556 (TLID:
144100648) to Unnamed 647003905 (TLID:144100710), and proceeding easterly along
Unnamed 647003905 (TLID:144100710) to Jennifer Ln, and proceeding southerly
along Jennifer Ln to Unnamed 647003915 (TLID:144130694), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 647003915 (TLID:144130694) to Unnamed 144651583 (TLID:
144130703), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed 144651583 (TLID:144130703) to
N Macy St, and proceeding southerly along N Macy St to Adams St, and proceeding
easterly along Adams St to Unnamed 144651697 (TLID:144131306), and proceeding
easterly along Unnamed 144651697 (TLID:144131306) to N State St, and proceeding
southerly along N State St to W Highland Ave, and proceeding easterly along W
Highland Ave to N California St, and proceeding northerly along N California St
to W Porter St, and proceeding westerly along W Porter St to Unnamed 144994461
(TLID:144134312), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144994461 (TLID:
144134312) to Mallory St, and proceeding easterly along Mallory St to Unnamed
647991237 (TLID:144172485), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647991237
(TLID:144172485) to Unnamed 647004267 (TLID:144172524), and proceeding easterly
along Unnamed 647004267 (TLID:144172524) to N California St, and proceeding
northerly along N California St to Unnamed 144651243 (TLID:144173409), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 144651243 (TLID:144173409) to Unnamed
648092548 (TLID:144173393), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 648092548
(TLID:144173393) to Unnamed 653220056 (TLID:144174011), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 653220056 (TLID:144174011) to Burlington Northern Santa
Fe Rlwy, and proceeding northerly along Burlington Northern Santa Fe Rlwy to
Unnamed 144649647 (TLID:144156178), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed
144649647 (TLID:144156178) to June St, and proceeding westerly along June St to
June Pl, and proceeding westerly along June Pl to San Benito Ave, and
proceeding northerly along San Benito Ave to Unnamed 646991146 (TLID:
144154938), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 646991146 (TLID:144154938) to
Unnamed 647987575 (TLID:144154916), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
647987575 (TLID:144154916) to Unnamed 144689372 (TLID:144153719), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144689372 (TLID:144153719) to Unnamed
144689371 (TLID:144153651), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144689371
(TLID:144153651) to Unnamed 647990352 (TLID:144153523), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 647990352 (TLID:144153523) to Unnamed 647989661 (TLID:
144152954), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647989661 (TLID:144152954) to
Unnamed 646974591 (TLID:144152866), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
646974591 (TLID:144152866) to Unnamed 647987625 (TLID:144153835), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 647987625 (TLID:144153835) to Cajon Blvd,
and proceeding northerly along Cajon Blvd to Unnamed 144688372 (TLID:
144153983), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144688372 (TLID:144153983) to
Unnamed 144979241 (TLID:144151590), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
144979241 (TLID:144151590) to Unnamed 144979240 (TLID:144151523), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144979240 (TLID:144151523) to Burlington
Northern Santa Fe Rlwy, and proceeding southerly along Burlington Northern
Santa Fe Rlwy to Unnamed 646974346 (TLID:144151325), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 646974346 (TLID:144151325) to Unnamed 647992210 (TLID:144151279),
and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647992210 (TLID:144151279) to Unnamed
653220049 (TLID:144150830), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 653220049
(TLID:144150830) to Unnamed 646973742 (TLID:144150820), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 646973742 (TLID:144150820) to Unnamed 646973648 (TLID:
144150862), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 646973648 (TLID:144150862)
to Unnamed 646973642 (TLID:144150810), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
646973642 (TLID:144150810) to Unnamed 144734920 (TLID:144150800), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 144734920 (TLID:144150800) to Unnamed
646971797 (TLID:144046747), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 646971797
(TLID:144046747) to Unnamed 653220036 (TLID:144049221), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 653220036 (TLID:144049221) to Unnamed 649808942 (TLID:
144049234), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 649808942 (TLID:144049234)
to Unnamed 646971092 (TLID:144049371), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
646971092 (TLID:144049371) to Unnamed 646967946 (TLID:144048669), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 646967946 (TLID:144048669) to Unnamed
646967810 (TLID:144048652), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 646967810
(TLID:144048652) to Unnamed 646967807 (TLID:144208548), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 646967807 (TLID:144208548) to Unnamed 646967628 (TLID:
144208567), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 646967628 (TLID:144208567)
to Unnamed 646967629 (TLID:144208579), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
646967629 (TLID:144208579) to Unnamed 646967626 (TLID:144208560), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 646967626 (TLID:144208560) to Unnamed
646967623 (TLID:144208619), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 646967623
(TLID:144208619) to Unnamed 644267485 (TLID:144208690), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 644267485 (TLID:144208690) to Unnamed 145000957 (TLID:
144208699), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 145000957 (TLID:144208699)
to the point of beginning;
   (B)   As well as beginning at the point of intersection of Unnamed 653160124
(TLID:144198292) and Unnamed 646962861 (TLID:99474419), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 653160124 (TLID:144198292) to Unnamed 647990945 (TLID:
144198270), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 647990945 (TLID:144198270) to
Unnamed 646962906 (TLID:144198283), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
646962906 (TLID:144198283) to Unnamed 646962861 (TLID:99474419), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 646962861 (TLID:99474419) to the point of beginning;
and
   (C)   As well as beginning at the point of intersection of Unnamed 646963192
(TLID:144202536) and Unnamed 646963189 (TLID:144198860), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 646963192 (TLID:144202536) to Unnamed 646963190 (TLID:
144202511), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 646963190 (TLID:144202511) to
Unnamed 650709814 (TLID:144202517), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed
650709814 (TLID:144202517) to Unnamed 650709810 (TLID:144198844), and
proceeding westerly along Unnamed 650709810 (TLID:144198844) to Unnamed
650709798 (TLID:144198469), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed 650709798
(TLID:144198469) to Unnamed 646963189 (TLID:144198860), and proceeding
northerly along Unnamed 646963189 (TLID:144198860) to the point of beginning.
(Ord. MC-1376, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. MC-1567, passed 12-15-2021)
§ 1.16.080 SEVENTH WARD.
   Seventh District: the region bounded and described as follows: beginning at
the point of intersection of Harrison St N and E 40th St, and proceeding
southerly along Harrison St N to del Norte Dr, and proceeding easterly along
del Norte Dr to Unnamed 647128853 (TLID:144413985), and proceeding westerly
along Unnamed 647128853 (TLID:144413985) to Harrison St N, and proceeding
southerly along Harrison St N to E Lynwood Dr, and proceeding easterly along E
Lynwood Dr to N del Rosa Ave, and proceeding southerly along N del Rosa Ave to
Unnamed 144656063 (TLID:144424746), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
144656063 (TLID:144424746) to N Ironwood St, and proceeding northerly along N
Ironwood St to E Lynwood Dr, and proceeding easterly along E Lynwood Dr to
Merito Ave, and proceeding easterly along Merito Ave to E Lynwood Dr, and
proceeding easterly along E Lynwood Dr to N Sterling Ave, and proceeding
southerly along N Sterling Ave to E Citrus St, and proceeding easterly along E
Citrus St to Unnamed 144992621 (TLID:144448323), and proceeding southerly along
Unnamed 144992621 (TLID:144448323) to N Sterling Ave, and proceeding southerly
along N Sterling Ave to Date St E, and proceeding westerly along Date St E to
Unnamed 647110707 (TLID:144376007), and proceeding northerly along Unnamed
647110707 (TLID:144376007) to Unnamed 648269766 (TLID:144376070), and
proceeding northerly along Unnamed 648269766 (TLID:144376070) to Unnamed
648269767 (TLID:144376037), and proceeding westerly along Unnamed 648269767
(TLID:144376037) to Unnamed 647110766 (TLID:144375225), and proceeding
southerly along Unnamed 647110766 (TLID:144375225) to Unnamed 647110785 (TLID:
144375169), and proceeding southerly along Unnamed 647110785 (TLID:144375169)
to Foothill Fwy, and proceeding southerly along Foothill Fwy to N del Rosa Ave,
and proceeding southerly along N del Rosa Ave to E Highland Ave, and proceeding
westerly along E Highland Ave to Windsor Dr, and proceeding westerly along
Windsor Dr to E Highland Ave, and proceeding westerly along E Highland Ave to W
Highland Ave, and proceeding westerly along W Highland Ave to N D St, and
proceeding westerly along ND St to W Highland Ave, and proceeding westerly
along W Highland Ave to N Muscupiahe Dr, and proceeding northerly along N
Muscupiahe Dr to W Colima Rd, and proceeding easterly along W Colima Rd to N
Muscupiabe Dr, and proceeding northerly along N Muscupiahe Dr to Foothill Fwy,
and proceeding easterly along Foothill Fwy to N H St, and proceeding northerly
along N H St to W Edgehill Rd, and proceeding easterly along W Edgehill Rd to W
34th St, and proceeding easterly along W 34th St to N E St, and proceeding
northerly along N E St to W Kendall Dr, and proceeding northerly along W
Kendall Dr to N Arrowhead Ave, and proceeding easterly along N Arrowhead Ave to
Unnamed 145230876 (TLID:144391132), and proceeding easterly along Unnamed
145230876 (TLID:144391132) to N Arrowhead Ave, and proceeding easterly along N
Arrowhead Ave to W Thompson Pl, and proceeding easterly along W Thompson Pl to
N Mountain View Ave, and proceeding easterly along N Mountain View Ave to N
Electric Ave, and proceeding northerly along N Electric Ave to W 40th St, and
proceeding easterly along W 40th St to E 40th St, and proceeding easterly along
E 40th St to the point of beginning.
(Ord. MC-1376, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. MC-1567, passed 12-15-2021)
CHAPTER 1.20: WORKING OF PROBATIONERS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
   
1.20.010   Compulsion to perform labor when
   
1.20.020   Probationer engaged under this chapter not deemed city employee
§ 1.20.010 COMPULSION TO PERFORM LABOR WHEN.
   In accordance with the provisions of Cal. Penal Code, § 1203.1 and Cal.
Gov’t Code, § 25359, any or all persons granted summary probation may be
compelled to perform labor under the direction of the Director of the City
Parks and Recreation Department, or such other person as the court may direct,
on the public works or ways, public grounds, roads, streets, alleys, highways,
firebreaks, fire roads, riding or hiking trails, public buildings or in such
other places in the city as deemed advisable for the benefit of the public;
provided, however, that no probationer shall be compelled to perform labor who
may be physically unable to do so or whose safekeeping may be endangered
thereby.
(Ord. 3330, passed 2-16-1973)
§ 1.20.020 PROBATIONER ENGAGED UNDER THIS CHAPTER NOT DEEMED CITY EMPLOYEE.
   No probationer engaged in the performance of labor pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be considered an employee of, or to be
employed by, the city or any department thereof. Furthermore, no such person
shall come within any of the provisions of the Workers’ Compensation Insurance
and Safety Act of 1970 (Cal. Labor Code, Divisions 4 and 5) or be entitled to
any benefits thereunder whether on behalf of himself or herself or any other
person.
(Ord. 3330, passed 2-16-1973)
CHAPTER 1.24: DESIGNATION OF OLD CITY
Section
   
1.24.010   Reference to plat
§ 1.24.010 REFERENCE TO PLAT.
   The portion of the city designated “City of San Bernardino” on the plat
thereof, recorded in Book 7 of Maps, Page 1, of the records in the County
Recorder’s office, is designated as “Old City,” and in all proceedings of the
Mayor and City Council, in any or all documents made or executed by any officer
of the city, such portion of the city may be designated as “Old City” and, when
designated, shall be deemed to mean that portion of the city shown on said map.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921)
CHAPTER 1.26: TIME LIMITATIONS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE MANDAMUS PROCEEDINGS
Section
   
1.26.010   Adoption of time limits of Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil
Procedure
   
1.26.020   Definition of decision
   
1.26.030   Preparation and payment for record and reporter’s transcript
   
1.26.040   Notice of time limits
§ 1.26.010 ADOPTION OF TIME LIMITS OF SECTION 1094.6 OF THE CODE OF CIVIL
PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any judicial action taken to review, set aside, annul or vacate any
decision, finding or action taken by the Mayor and City Council or of any
commission, board, officer or agent of the city shall be filed within the time
limits prescribed in Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, § 1094.6. For abatement of
dangerous buildings pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 15.28, a 30-day time limitation within which a judicial action to
review, set aside, annul or vacate any decision, finding or action taken by the
Mayor and City Council is imposed, due to the urgency of relief required for
the public health and safety.
   (B)   If any sentence, clause or phrase of this section is for any reason
held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portion of this section.
(Ord. MC-85, passed 8-4-1981; Ord. MC-216, passed 10-25-1982; Ord. MC-410,
passed 9-18-1984)
§ 1.26.020 DEFINITION OF DECISION.
   As used in this chapter, DECISION includes, but is not limited to, an
adjudicatory administrative decision made after a hearing suspending, demoting
or dismissing an officer or employee, revoking or denying an application for a
permit or a license; or denying an application for any retirement benefit or
allowance.
(Ord. MC-85, passed 8-4-1981; Ord. MC-216, passed 10-25-1982)
§ 1.26.030 PREPARATION AND PAYMENT FOR RECORD AND REPORTER’S TRANSCRIPT.
   Upon the filing of a written request for the record of the proceedings or
any portion thereof, an amount estimated to cover the actual cost of preparing
the record shall be deposited in advance with the city official preparing the
record. The record prepared by the city official shall include the transcript
of the proceedings, other than a reporter’s transcript; all pleadings, notices,
orders, final decision, exhibits admitted or rejected; all written evidence;
and any other papers in the case. When a hearing has been reported by a court
reporter and the petitioner desires a reporter’s transcript, the petitioner
shall arrange directly with the court reporter for the transcript, pay the
reporter directly and lodge the transcript with the court, serving notice of
the lodging to the City Attorney.
(Ord. MC-216, passed 10-25-1982)
§ 1.26.040 NOTICE OF TIME LIMITS.
   Upon rendition of any adjudicatory administrative decision by the city,
notice shall be provided to the parties that the time within which judicial
review must be sought is governed by the provisions of the Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure, § 1094.6.
(Ord. MC-216, passed 10-25-1982)
CHAPTER 1.28: RESERVED
[Reserved]
TITLE 2: ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
   Chapter
      
2.01.   MAYOR PRO TEMPORE
      
2.02.   CITY MANAGER
      
2.03.   VACANCIES
      
2.04.   PERSONNEL SYSTEM
      
2.06.   PURCHASING AGENT
      
2.08.   CITY TREASURER
      
2.10.   DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND MANAGEMENT SERVICES
      
2.12.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
2.14.   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
      
2.15.   DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND HOUSING
      
2.16.   DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT
      
2.17.   BOARDS, BUREAUS AND COMMISSIONS - GENERAL
      
2.18.   PARKS, RECREATION AND COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT
      
2.19.   ELECTED OFFICIAL COMPENSATION ADVISORY COMMISSION
      
2.20.   SPECIAL COUNSEL SERVICES
      
2.22.   PLANNING COMMISSION
      
2.23.   HISTORICAL PRESERVATION COMMISSION
      
2.24.   CENTRAL CITY PARKING PLACE COMMISSION
      
2.26.   ANIMAL CONTROL COMMISSION
      
2.27.   LIBRARY BOARD
      
2.28.   BOARD OF WATER COMMISSIONERS
      
2.30.   FINE ARTS COMMISSION
      
2.31.   RELOCATION APPEALS BOARD
      
2.32.   BOARD OF FIRE COMMISSIONERS
      
2.34.   BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS
      
2.36.   PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING
      
2.38.   POLICE RESERVE
      
2.39.   HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
      
2.40.   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
      
2.41.   MAIN STREET ADVISORY BOARD
      
2.42.   COMMUNITY TELEVISION COMMISSION
      
2.43.   BUREAU OF FRANCHISES
      
2.44.   CEMETERY COMMISSION
      
2.45.   BUILDING APPEALS BOARD
      
2.46.   DISASTER COUNCIL
      
2.47.   CENTRAL CITY ADVISORY BOARD
      
2.48.   STATE EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM
      
2.49.   SENIOR AFFAIRS COMMISSION
      
2.50.   PERSONNEL COMMISSION
      
2.52.   CITY HALL
      
2.54.   HOLIDAYS
      
2.55.   LOCAL CAMPAIGN FINANCE REGULATIONS
      
2.56.   ELECTIONS
      
2.57.   ONLINE OR ELECTRONIC FILING OF FAIR POLITICAL PRACTICES COMMISSION
FORMS
      
2.58.   MEETINGS
      
2.60.   DISCLOSURE OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS
      
2.62.   FILING OF OFFICIAL BONDS
      
2.64.   APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL
      
2.65.   SALE OF REAL PROPERTY
      
2.66.   CONTRACT OF INDEMNITY
      
2.68.   VACANCIES IN OFFICE
      
2.70.   SALE OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
      
2.72.   DEMANDS AGAINST CITY; PAYMENT
      
2.73.   COLLECTION OF DEBTS
      
2.74.   FINANCIAL INTERESTS OF APPOINTED CITY COMMITTEE MEMBERS
      
2.75.   USE OF CITY’S CATV FACILITIES
      
2.76.   COUNCIL COMMITTEES
      
2.77.   FACILITIES MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
      
2.78.   CODE COMPLIANCE DEPARTMENT
      
2.79.   INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT
      
2.80.   ANIMAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT
      
2.81.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
2.82.   MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL COMPENSATION
      
2.83.   DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 2.01: MAYOR PRO TEMPORE
Section
   
2.01.010   Mayor Pro Tempore
§ 2.01.010 MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
   (A)   City Charter, §
302 identifies the position of mayor pro tempore. At the first regularly
scheduled meeting of the City Council following the effective date of the
ordinance incorporated in this chapter, the City Council shall elect a Council
member to serve as Mayor Pro Tempore. At the second regularly scheduled meeting
of the City Council in December of each year, the City Council shall elect a
Council member to serve as Mayor Pro Tempore.
   (B)   If the Mayor Pro Tempore is absent or otherwise unavailable to serve
in such capacity, the Council member present in the city with the most
consecutive days of service as a member of the City Council shall serve as the
Mayor Pro Tempore for that period of absence or unavailability only.
“Consecutive days of service” shall be calculated by counting backward in time
starting from the day on which the calculation is being made.
   (C)   In the event that there are two or more Council members with the exact
same number of consecutive days of service as a member of the City Council, the
temporary filling of the position of Mayor Pro Tempore shall be determined by
lot, pursuant to the general procedure established in the Cal. Elections Code,
§ 15651, specifically by flipping a coin in the case of two members with the
exact same number of consecutive days of service as a member of the City
Council, or the drawing of straws in the case of three or more members with the
exact same number of consecutive days of service as a member of the City
Council. The City Clerk shall be responsible for conducting the coin toss or
conducting the drawing of straws whenever either event is required by this
section.
   (D)   The Council Member holding the position of Mayor Pro Tempore shall
continue to hold said position until his or her successor is elected by the
City Council or until said Council member is no longer a member of the City
Council, whichever occurs first.
   (E)   Pursuant to City Charter, §
302, in the absence of the Mayor from any Council meeting, the Mayor Pro
Tempore shall preside over that Council meeting.
   (F)   In addition, at all other times that the Mayor is temporarily unable
to perform the duties of his or her office, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall have
all powers and authority that the Mayor would have possessed if present to
perform his or her duties. However, the Mayor Pro Tempore may not cast an
additional vote in the event of a tie or exercise veto powers over City Council
action, but may continue to exercise his or her vote as a Council member.
(Ord. MC-1267, passed 4-8-2008; Ord. MC-1289, passed 11-4-2008; Ord. MC-1441,
passed 4-3-2017)
CHAPTER 2.02: CITY MANAGER
Section
   
2.02.010   Position created
   
2.02.020   Selection and appointment
   
2.02.030   Discharge
   
2.02.040   Salary and benefits
   
2.02.050   Assistants
   
2.02.060   Duties of the City Manager
   
2.02.070   Authority to file and prosecute small claims
   
2.02.080   Mayor and Council’s authority over the City Manager and other city
employees
   
2.02.090   Accountability and expectations
   
2.02.100   Reserved
§ 2.02.010 POSITION CREATED.
   There is created the position of City Manager as required by
Article IV of the City Charter. Any and all references to the administrative
officer or City Administrator in any ordinances, resolutions and documents of
the city shall refer to and mean the City Manager.
(Ord. 2397, passed 11-21-1961; Ord. 2836, passed 8-15-1967; Ord. MC-839, passed
6-11-1992; Ord. MC-1440, passed 4-3-2017)
§ 2.02.020 SELECTION AND APPOINTMENT.
   The City Manager shall have the qualifications and shall be chosen in
accordance with Article IV, §
400 of the City Charter by at least five affirmative votes of the Council and
Mayor. The City Manager shall devote his or her entire time to the duties of
his or her office and shall not engage in any other business or occupation.
(Ord. 2397, passed 11-21-1961; Ord. MC-839, passed 6-11-1992; Ord. MC-1440,
passed 4-3-2017)
§ 2.02.030 DISCHARGE.
   The City Manager may be discharged by at least five affirmative votes of the
Council and Mayor as provided in Article IV, §
400 of the City Charter.
(Ord. 2397, passed 11-21-1961; Ord. 3120, passed 11-10-1970; Ord. MC-839,
passed 6-11-1992; Ord. MC-1226, passed 6-7-2006; Ord. MC-1440, passed 4-3-2017)
§ 2.02.040 SALARY AND BENEFITS.
   The salary of the City Manager shall be fixed by the Mayor and City Council
and it shall be paid in the same manner and at the same time as the salaries of
other city employees. He or she is granted and is entitled to all of the
benefits conferred upon city employees relating to sick leave, vacation leave,
holidays, medical insurance, workers’ compensation and travel expense, and by
the public employees’ retirement system, and any other salary and/or benefits
that may be provided by resolution or pursuant to an employment agreement
between the city and the City Manager.
(Ord. 2397, passed 11-21-1961; Ord. MC-839, passed 6-11-1992; Ord. MC-1440,
passed 4-3-2017)
§ 2.02.050 ASSISTANTS.
   The Mayor and City Council shall create and maintain positions within the
city’s authorized classification and salary list for an assistant city manager
and department heads for each of the city’s authorized departments. In order to
assist the City Manager in the performance of his or her duties, the City
Manager may assign the performance of any of the duties prescribed in this
chapter to his or her assistants or department heads. The City Manager may
appoint an assistant city manager.
(Ord. 2397, passed 11-21-1961; Ord. 3286, passed 8-24-1972; Ord. MC-839, passed
6-11-1992; Ord. MC-1440, passed 4-3-2017)
§ 2.02.060 DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   The City Manager shall perform the duties set out in Article IV, §
401 of the City Charter, and such other duties as may be assigned to him or her
by duly adopted ordinance.
   (B)   In addition to the authority and duties outlined in Article IV, §
401 of the City Charter, the City Manager shall:
      (1)   Determine the items and order of such items on the City Council’s
meeting agendas, subject to direction from the Mayor and City Council. The City
Manager shall include any agenda item requested by the presiding officer of the
City Council for discussion and further direction from a majority of the City
Council;
      (2)   Confer regularly with the City Attorney on legal issues;
immediately notify the City Attorney of any important legal issues or
difficulties that arise to obtain the legal advice of the City Attorney; and
carefully consider such advice, understanding that recommendations of the City
Attorney are advisory only. Neither the City Attorney, nor employees of the
office of the City Attorney, has the authority to issue orders to the City
Manager, or any of his or her subordinates; it is the responsibility of the
City Manager to ensure that all Manager-directed departments and the employees
of those departments perform all of their duties legally and that those
departments and their employees are faithful in the observance, adherence and
enforcement of all pertinent laws, ordinances and legal requirements in the
performance of their duties and in their official conduct;
      (3)   Sign all contracts, deeds and other documents on behalf of the city
when authorized to do so by the Mayor and City Council;
      (4)   See that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the
city, and the provisions of all contracts to which the city is a party, are
faithfully observed;
      (5)   Consolidate or combine duties, offices, positions, departments or
units under his or her direction, after informing and seeking input from the
Mayor and City Council within the limits established by the City Charter, this
code or the annual budget; provided, however, that nothing herein contained
shall be construed to supersede the authority of the Personnel Commission in
the matter of disciplinary appeals;
      (6)   Control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and
to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his or her jurisdiction
through their department heads;
      (7)   Investigate as necessary all complaints and other matters
concerning the administration of the city government. However, as to any
complaint or other matter concerning the administration of the City Manager’s
office, it shall be referred to outside independent legal counsel for
investigation;
      (8)   Close or restrict access to any and all public property owned or
controlled by the city during the pendency of any construction, repair,
remedial, maintenance or modification work on public property upon reasonable
notice to the public posted at or near the site of the proposed work;
      (9)   Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public
parks and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of
the City Council and not specifically delegated to a particular board or
officer;
      (10)   Designate city officers or employees of the city to exercise the
powers authorized by the Cal. Penal Code, § 836.5(a), including the issuance of
citations for violations of the provisions of the city’s municipal code,
pursuant to the Cal. Penal Code, §§ 853.5 and 853.6. He or she is also
responsible for general policy supervision of the public safety functions and
primary liaison between these departments and the City Council;
      (11)   Ensure the preparation, posting and publication of City Council
meeting agendas and of other commission and committee agendas in compliance
with the law, as well as maintenance of the books and records of the city;
      (12)   Ensure that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to
the City Council except on approval of the City Manager, or his or her
authorized representative. The City Manager, or his or her authorized
representative, shall purchase or cause to be purchased all supplies for all
departments of the city, consistent with the terms of the city’s purchasing
system set forth in
Chapter 3.04 of this code, and within the spending limits imposed by the City
Council by resolution or as authorized by the City Council;
      (13)   Make such administrative rules and regulations as the City Manager
deems necessary for the orderly administration of the various departments of
the city; and
      (14)   Ensure that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to
the City Council except on approval of the City Manager, or his or her
authorized representative. The City Manager, or his or her authorized
representative, shall purchase, or cause to be purchased, all supplies for all
departments of the city, consistent with the terms of the city’s purchasing
system set forth in
Chapter 3.04, and within the spending limits imposed by the City Council by
resolution or as authorized by the City Council.
(Ord. 2397, passed 11-21-1961; Ord. MC-839, passed 6-11-1992; Ord. MC-1440,
passed 4-3-2017; Ord. MC-1516, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 2.02.070 AUTHORITY TO FILE AND PROSECUTE SMALL CLAIMS.
   The City Manager, or his or her designated representative, is authorized to
file and prosecute actions on behalf of the city in the small claims courts of
the state. The City Manager, or his or her designated representative, is
authorized to reduce the claim of the city by an amount not in excess of the
jurisdictional maximum amount of a small claims court.
(Ord. 2397, passed 11-21-1961; Ord. MC-839, passed 6-11-1992; Ord. MC-1440,
passed 4-3-2017)
§ 2.02.080 MAYOR AND COUNCIL’S AUTHORITY OVER THE CITY MANAGER AND OTHER CITY
EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   In accordance with the City Charter, §
306(d), neither the Mayor nor any Council member shall interfere with the
discretion of the City Manager in the exercise or performance of his or her
powers or duties. The Mayor and Council members shall deal with city officers
and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the City
Manager solely through the City Manager, and shall not give orders to or
attempt to direct the work of such officers and employees either publicly or
privately. Inquiries may be made directly to officers and employees under the
supervision of the City Manager with the knowledge and consent of the City
Manager.
   (B)   The City Manager shall not unreasonably restrict the ability of the
Mayor or any Council member to make inquiries directly to officers and
employees under the supervision of the City Manager. In accordance with the
City Charter, §
401(d), the City Manager shall ensure that the Mayor and Council members are
fully informed on all aspects of important emerging issues, and shall provide
timely and complete responses to inquiries from the Mayor or Council members.
The City Manager shall not withhold relevant and material information from the
Mayor or Council members.
(Ord. 2397, passed 11-21-1961; Ord. MC-839, passed 6-11-1992; Ord. MC-1440,
passed 4-3-2017; Ord. MC-1516, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 2.02.090 ACCOUNTABILITY AND EXPECTATIONS.
   In order to most effectively ensure that the council-manager form of
government works properly, the Mayor and City Council will jointly develop
clear expectations of the City Manager and hold him or her accountable by
conducting performance evaluations at least once a year.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3883, passed 11-20-1979; Ord. MC-839, passed
6-11-1992; Ord. MC-1440, passed 4-3-2017)
§ 2.02.100 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1440, passed 4-3-2017)
CHAPTER 2.03: VACANCIES
Section
   
2.03.010   Vacancies
§ 2.03.010 VACANCIES.
   (A)   A vacancy on the City Council, from whatever cause arising, shall be
filled for the unexpired term thereof through the election of a successor
Council member by the qualified electors of the ward in which the vacancy has
occurred. Such successor Council member must be eligible to hold the office in
accordance with the City Charter, §
301. The election shall be held at the time established by the Mayor and City
Council and shall be conducted in the manner provided for by general law;
provided that the Mayor and City Council shall have power, by ordinance, to
provide for the manner of holding such election and such ordinance shall
prevail over the general law.
   (B)   A vacancy in the office of Mayor, from whatever cause arising, shall
be filled for the unexpired term thereof through the election of a successor
Mayor by the qualified electors of the city. Such successor Mayor must be
eligible to hold the office in accordance with the City Charter, §
301. The election shall be held at the time established by the Mayor and City
Council and shall be conducted in the manner provided for by general law;
provided that the Mayor and City Council shall have the power by ordinance to
provide for the manner of holding such election and such ordinance shall
prevail over the general law. The successor elected shall hold the office for
the unexpired term. Prior to filling the vacancy of the office of Mayor, and in
the process of filling such vacancy, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall not have the
authority to exercise any veto or vetoes.
   (C)   Notwithstanding Cal. Elections Code, §§ 4000 and 4004 or any similar
law, the City Council may, by resolution, order that any election to fill such
vacancy be conducted wholly by all-mail ballot on any established mailed ballot
election date provided under the Elections Code.
(Ord. MC-1508, passed 10-17-2018; Ord. MC-1509, passed 11-21-2018; Ord. MC-
1510, passed 12-19-2018; Ord. MC-1512, passed 1-10-2019)
CHAPTER 2.04: PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Section
   
2.04.010   Personnel system established
   
2.04.020   Classified service
   
2.04.030   Unclassified service
   
2.04.040   Reserved
   
2.04.050   Reserved
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was repealed and replaced by Ord. MC-1475, passed 3-7-2018.
§ 2.04.010 PERSONNEL SYSTEM ESTABLISHED.
   A personnel system is established for the selection, employment,
advancement, discipline and compensation of all appointive officers and
employees. This system shall be implemented under conditions of competitive
merit, political neutrality and equal opportunity, pursuant to this code, rules
adopted by resolution of the City Council and such subordinate rules as are not
in conflict therewith which may be adopted by the appointing authority, or its
designee. Except as otherwise provided in the City Charter or in this municipal
code, the personnel system shall be administered by the Department of Human
Resources and Risk Management. The City Council shall have the power to
establish classifications and pay ranges for all employees of the city,
including those in the City Municipal Water Department and the library.
(Ord. 2481, passed 1-29-1963; Ord. MC-198, passed 8-11-1982; Ord. MC-1027,
passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1475, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 2.04.020 CLASSIFIED SERVICE.
   Classified service includes all regular full-time employees not specifically
included in the unclassified service within the city’s municipal code. All city
employees in the classified service, including those in the City Municipal
Water Department and the library, shall be subject to the city’s adopted
personnel rules.
(Ord. MC-666, passed 7-17-1989; Ord. MC-1475, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 2.04.030 UNCLASSIFIED SERVICE.
   (A)   Unclassified service includes those positions associated with part-
time employment, temporary employment, seasonal employment and the following
officers and employees:
      (1)   Elected officials;
      (2)   Any position appointed by the Mayor and City Council, including the
City Manager, City Clerk and City Attorney;
      (3)   Any persons appointed as deputies or assistants of elected or
appointed officers, regardless of job title or to whom they report;
      (4)   Any persons appointed as Assistant City Manager, deputies or other
assistants of the City Manager;
      (5)   Any persons appointed as heads of departments or heads of
department divisions;
      (6)   One assistant for each department and one assistant for the City
Manager; and
      (7)   Any persons appointed to a board or commission.
   (B)   All employees not included in the classified service of the city under
this chapter shall serve at the will and pleasure of the appointing authority.
They may be appointed, controlled, ordered and directed by the appointing
authority in any manner which is in compliance with applicable law, and may be
disciplined or removed from city employment by the appointing authority without
proof of cause or other justification and without the right of appeal. Elected
officials and persons appointed by the City Council to city boards, commissions
or committees shall serve in accordance with applicable state and local laws,
including this code, and may only be removed from office in accordance with
such laws. Part-time, seasonal and temporary employees shall be provided only
those benefits mandated by applicable federal, state and/or local laws, rules
or regulations.
(Ord. MC-198, passed 8-11-1982; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1475,
passed 3-7-2018)
§ 2.04.040 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed and replaced by Ord. MC-1475, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 2.04.050 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed and replaced by Ord. MC-1475, passed 3-7-2018)
CHAPTER 2.06: PURCHASING AGENT
Section
   
2.06.010   Position established
   
2.06.020   Powers and duties
§ 2.06.010 POSITION ESTABLISHED.
   A purchasing system is established which shall be administered by a
purchasing agent. The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall serve as the
purchasing agent.
(Ord. 2398, passed 9-21-1961)
§ 2.06.020 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The purchasing agent shall have charge of the purchasing of supplies,
materials, equipment and contractual services required by any office,
department or agency of the city, with the exception of the City Municipal
Water Department and free public library, and shall have the power and the duty
to:
   (A)   Establish a purchasing program providing for competitive bidding or
open market purchasing so as to obtain for the city the greatest possible
advantage;
   (B)   Establish and enforce specifications with respect to supplies,
materials and equipment required by city government;
   (C)   Supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials and
equipment and determine their conformance with specifications;
   (D)   Transfer between offices, departments or agencies, or sell any
surplus, obsolete or unused supplies, materials or equipment;
   (E)   Maintain and operate central duplicating printing and mail service;
   (F)   Prepare a manual setting forth procedure to be followed by all
departments as to the purchase of materials and equipment; and
   (G)   Perform such other duties as may be imposed by ordinance or resolution
of the City Council or as the City Manager may direct.
(Ord. 2398, passed 9-21-1961; Ord. 3842, passed 7-11-1979; Ord. MC-602, passed
6-2-1987; Ord. MC-646, passed 12-7-1988; Ord. MC-1220, passed 3-20-2006)
CHAPTER 2.08: CITY TREASURER
Section
   
2.08.010   Treasurer function
§ 2.08.010 TREASURER FUNCTION.
   All duties of the City Treasurer are transferred to the Department of
Finance and Management Services. Upon the completion of the term of office of
the elected City Treasurer holding office upon adoption of the ordinance
incorporated in this chapter, the City Manager shall appoint the Director of
Finance and Management Services, or other duly qualified person, to carry out
all functions of the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 3472, passed 1-8-1975; Ord. MC-1476, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
CHAPTER 2.10: DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND MANAGEMENT SERVICES
Section
   
2.10.010   Created
   
2.10.020   Position established - bond
   
2.10.030   Powers and duties
   
2.10.040   Divisions of department
Statutory reference:
   For provisions authorizing the establishment of the office of Director of
Finance and the transfer of the City Clerk’s duties to such office, see Cal.
Gov’t Code, §§ 37209 and 40805.5
§ 2.10.010 CREATED.
   A department of finance and management services is created.
(Ord. 2855, passed 10-3-1967; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 2.10.020 POSITION ESTABLISHED - BOND.
   (A)   The position of director of finance and management services of the
city is established. This position shall be in the unclassified service of the
civil service.
   (B)   The Director of Finance and Management Services shall be appointed by
the City Manager.
   (C)   The Director of Finance and Management Services shall execute and
deposit a fidelity bond in the amount of $10,000 prior to taking office.
(Ord. 2855, passed 10-3-1967; Ord. 3426, passed 5-20-1974; Ord. MC-1477, passed
3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 2.10.030 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Director of Finance and Management Services, under the supervision
and direction of the City Manager, or his or her designee, shall have charge of
the administration of the financial affairs of the city, except for the City
Municipal Water Department.
   (B)   The Director of Finance and Management Services shall have the
following powers and duties:
      (1)   To ensure deposit of all money received by and on behalf of the
city in such depository or depositories as may be designated by the Mayor and
City Council, in compliance with all the provisions of the California
Constitution and laws of the state governing the handling, deposit and securing
of public funds and the handling of trust funds in his or her possession;
      (2)   To maintain custody of money deposited in the City Treasury, to
invest same pursuant to the city’s adopted investment policy and to transfer
money from one fund into another fund by motion and a majority vote of the City
Council or by its approval of the tentative and final budgets containing fund
balances for each fiscal year;
      (3)   To maintain custody of all securities bought by the city government
for the account of any fund and of any unsold bonds of the city, and to make
investments and keep records of those investments on behalf of the city. In the
event of the sale of any bonds by the city, as provided by law, to deliver the
same, and receive from the purchaser the amount of money due from such sale,
and credit the same to the proper bank account in the same manner as other
deposits and report such action to the legislative body and the City Manager;
      (4)   To supervise all disbursements and expenditures to assure that
payment has been legally authorized and appropriated, and that sufficient
unencumbered appropriations exist for the payment of all claims and
expenditures;
      (5)   To develop, supervise and maintain the general accounting system
for the city government;
      (6)   To procure materials, supplies and general services for the city
and establish appropriate standards and specifications with respect to the
purchase of supplies, materials and equipment;
      (7)   To regularly, at least quarterly, and at the end of each fiscal
year, prepare and submit to the City Manager, and the Mayor and City Council, a
statement and report indicating the financial condition of the city, including,
but not limited to, receipts, disbursements, appropriations and reserves;
      (8)   To establish, supervise and maintain a system of data processing
for the handling of accounting information and other reports and tabulations
required by the city;
      (9)   He or she, or his or her designated representative, shall audit all
purchase orders before they become effective, and audit and approve, before
payment, all bills, invoices, payrolls, demands or charges against the city
government, and determine the regularity, correctness and, with the advice of
the City Attorney, the legality of such claims, demands and charges; and he or
she, or his or her designated representative, shall attach to the register of
audited demands, before submission to the Mayor and City Council, his or her
affidavit certifying as to the accuracy of the demands and the availability of
funds for payment thereof pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, § 37202; and he or she,
or his or her designated representative, in lieu of the City Clerk, shall
certify or approve demands as conforming to a budget approved by resolution
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, § 37208; provided that the provisions of Cal.
Gov’t Code, § 37208 shall in other particulars be applicable to the city;
      (10)   To compile the preliminary budget data, including capital and
operating expenditure projections, and revenue projections for the City
Manager;
      (11)   To prepare and maintain current inventory of all materials,
supplies and equipment of the city;
      (12)   To audit or designate a representative to audit all purchase
orders before they become effective, and audit and approve, before payment, all
bills, invoices, payrolls, demands or charges against the city government, and
determine the regularity, correctness and, with the advice of the City
Attorney, the legality of such claims, demands and charges; and to certify by
attached affidavit the accuracy of the register of audited demands, and the
availability of funds for payment thereof pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, § 37202
before submission to the Mayor and City Council; and to certify or approve
demands as conforming to a budget approved by resolution pursuant to Cal. Gov’t
Code, § 37208;
      (13)   To prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills or claims to
be used by all the agencies of the city;
      (14)   To supervise the work of preparing the city payroll and
maintaining records of all payroll data; and he or she shall supervise the work
for the state employees’ retirement system in accordance with the law and
administrative directors of the retirement system;
      (15)   To perform such other duties as may be imposed by ordinance or
resolution of the Mayor and City Council, or as the City Manager may direct;
and
      (16)   To appoint, supervise, discipline and evaluate employees of the
Department of Finance and Management Services.
(Ord. MC-1477, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 2.10.040 DIVISIONS OF DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Department of Finance and Management Services shall be under the
supervision of the Director of Finance and Management Services and shall
consist of the following divisions:
      (1)   Purchasing division;
      (2)   Accounting division;
      (3)   Payroll division; and
      (4)   Such other divisions as may be authorized by the Mayor and the City
Council.
   (B)   The heads of each of these divisions shall be in the unclassified
civil service.
(Ord. 2855, passed 10-3-1967; Ord. 3285, passed 8-24-1972; Ord. MC-1220, passed
3-20-2006; Ord. MC-1226, passed 6-7-2006; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
CHAPTER 2.12: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
2.12.010   Fire Chief
   
2.12.020   Fire Department
   
2.12.030   Authority of Fire Chief to enforce code provisions
   
2.12.040   Preservation of order at fires
   
2.12.050   Liability of city
Editor’s note:
   On July 1, 2016, the city annexed into the County Fire Protection District.
The County Fire Code and other ordinances were ratified by the Mayor and City
Council pursuant to Ord. MC-1422, passed 5-16-2016.
§ 2.12.010 FIRE CHIEF.
   All references within the city’s municipal code to the Fire Chief, where not
inconsistent with the annexation of fire services from the city to the County
Fire Protection District, shall mean the Fire Chief of the County Fire
Protection District and his or her designated subordinates within the County
Fire Protection District.
(Ord. 347, passed 1-12-1907; Ord. 1713, passed - -1944; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-
15-1985; Ord. MC-1422, passed 5-16-2016)
§ 2.12.020 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   All references within the city’s municipal code to the Fire Department,
where not inconsistent with the annexation of fire services from the city to
the County Fire Protection District, shall mean the County Fire Protection
District.
(Ord. 347, passed 1-12-1907; Ord. 1713, passed - -1944; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-
15-1985; Ord. MC-1422, passed 5-16-2016)
§ 2.12.030 AUTHORITY OF FIRE CHIEF TO ENFORCE CODE PROVISIONS.
   The Fire Chief, and his or her designated subordinates in the Fire
Department, may enforce the provisions of §§
9.52.070,
9.56.010,
12.36.020,
12.52.010 and Chapters
9.12 and
15.16, and are authorized to perform any act, including the preparation and
issuance of written notices to appear for violations thereof, under and
pursuant to the Cal. Penal Code, § 836.5 and Chapters 5C and 5D of Part 2,
Title 3 (commencing with § 853.6).
(Ord. 347, passed 1-12-1907; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 2.12.040 PRESERVATION OF ORDER AT FIRES.
   The Fire Chief shall, to the best of his or her ability, preserve order at
all fires, and shall, whenever proper or necessary, call upon the Chief of
Police or any other peace officer to preserve order and make arrests, and to
prevent interference with his or her orders or with the members of the
Department.
(Ord. 347, passed 1-12-1907; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 2.12.050 LIABILITY OF CITY.
   No liability shall be incurred by the city on account of the Fire
Department, except such as shall be incurred or approved by the Mayor and City
Council.
(Ord. 347, passed 1-12-1907; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1220,
passed 3-20-2006)
CHAPTER 2.14: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Section
   
2.14.010   Established
   
2.14.020   Director
   
2.14.030   Director - duties
   
2.14.031   City Engineer
   
2.14.032   City Engineer - duties
   
2.14.040   Meetings
§ 2.14.010 ESTABLISHED.
   There is established a department of public works.
(Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1322,
passed 4-20-2010)
§ 2.14.020 DIRECTOR.
   The Department shall be under the management and control of the Director of
Public Works, who shall be appointed by the City Manager with approval of the
Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1322,
passed 4-20-2010)
§ 2.14.030 DIRECTOR - DUTIES.
   Under the policies of the Mayor and City Council, the Director shall have
all the powers and perform all the duties that are now or may hereafter be
conferred upon the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1322, passed 4-20-2010)
§ 2.14.031 CITY ENGINEER.
   The position of city engineer is created and shall report to and be under
the supervision of the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1322, passed 4-20-2010)
§ 2.14.032 CITY ENGINEER - DUTIES.
   The City Engineer shall perform the appropriate duties as a registered
engineer as provided for in the Cal. Business and Professions Code, § 6730.2 or
any other applicable section of state law, the City Charter or the municipal
code.
(Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1226, passed 6-7-2006; Ord. MC-1322,
passed 4-20-2010)
§ 2.14.040 MEETINGS.
   The Director shall represent the Department of Public Works at all meetings
and hearings of the Mayor and City Council considering matters relating to
engineering, streets, rubbish, refuse disposal, improving of streets or public
works either in person or by duly authorized representatives.
(Ord. 3512, passed 7-15-1975; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1027,
passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1220, passed 3-20-2006; Ord. MC-1322, passed 4-20-
2010)
CHAPTER 2.15: DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND HOUSING
Section
   
2.15.010   Established
   
2.15.020   Director - duties
§ 2.15.010 ESTABLISHED.
   There is established a department of community development and housing.
(Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1322, passed 4-20-2010; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 2.15.020 DIRECTOR - DUTIES.
   The Department shall be under the management and control of the Director of
Community Development and Housing, who shall be appointed by the City Manager.
Under the policies of the Mayor and City Council, the Director shall have all
the powers and perform all the duties that are now or may hereafter be
conferred or imposed by the City Charter, law or the Mayor and City Council
relating to planning, building and safety, housing and code enforcement, and
shall plan, coordinate and report on all the duties and activities involved in
such programs.
(Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1220, passed 3-20-2006; Ord. MC-1322,
passed 4-20-2010; Ord. MC-1355, passed 7-5-2011; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-
2024)
CHAPTER 2.16: DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1220, passed 3-20-2006)
CHAPTER 2.17: BOARDS, BUREAUS AND COMMISSIONS - GENERAL
Section
   
2.17.010   General provisions
   
2.17.020   Members
   
2.17.030   Nomination - terms
   
2.17.035   Alternate members
   
2.17.040   Appointment - registered voter requirement - compensation - oath
   
2.17.050   Oath of office
   
2.17.060   Chairperson - meetings - absences
   
2.17.070   Quorum
   
2.17.080   Reporting
   
2.17.090   Hearing officers; powers; absence of quorum
   
2.17.100   Hearing officers; powers; referrals
   
2.17.110   Hearing officers; appeals of decision
§ 2.17.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   This chapter generally establishes the manner of appointments, term of
service, compensation, meeting times and provisions for vacating of offices of
members of the boards, commissions and citizen advisory committees established
by the City Council, except those established by the City Charter which are
addressed separately in this code and those governed by other municipal code
sections.
(Ord. MC-1454, passed 2-7-2018)
§ 2.17.020 MEMBERS.
   Each board, commission and citizen advisory committee, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, shall consist of nine members, unless otherwise
provided in the ordinance or resolution creating the board, commission or
citizen advisory committee.
(Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983; Ord. MC-1014, passed 1-13-1998; Ord. MC-1454,
passed 2-7-2018)
§ 2.17.030 NOMINATION - TERMS.
   Each City Council member shall nominate one member of each such board,
commission and citizen advisory committee who shall serve during and for the
term of the nominating Council member. The Mayor shall nominate two members to
each such board, commission and citizen advisory committee who shall serve
during and for the term of the Mayor. The terms of board, commission and
citizen advisory committee members shall coincide with the term of the
nominating City Council member or Mayor; provided that when a vacancy shall
occur in the office of the City Council member or the Mayor who originally
nominated any member, the applicable term of that member of the board,
commission or citizen advisory committee shall continue until a successor has
been appointed. Nomination and appointment of a replacement member at any time
shall terminate the appointment of any member so replaced, without need for
formal removal action.
(Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983; Ord. MC-1454, passed 2-7-2018)
§ 2.17.035 ALTERNATE MEMBERS.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1454, passed 2-7-2018)
§ 2.17.040 APPOINTMENT - REGISTERED VOTER REQUIREMENT - COMPENSATION - OATH.
   Each member of such board, commission or citizen advisory committee, after
having been nominated, shall be appointed by at least five affirmative votes of
the Mayor and City Council. Each member shall be and remain a registered voter
within the city and no member shall be an employee of the city. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Mayor and City Council may establish a downtown advisory
committee by resolution and may permit the appointment of non-city-resident
business professionals (i.e., local businesses) to the committee so long as the
non-city-residents each have an active business license with the city and
collectively make up less than 25% of that committee. Members shall serve,
without compensation, at the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council. Any member
no longer holding the qualifications required for appointment shall cease to
serve as a member, and such member’s position shall be deemed vacant. Any
vacancy shall be filled and appointment shall be made in the manner herein
before set forth as for an original appointment.
(Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983; Ord. MC-652, passed 2-20-1989; Ord. MC-1454,
passed 2-7-2018; Ord. MC-1552, passed 4-7-2021)
§ 2.17.050 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Prior to undertaking his or her duties as a member of any such board,
commission or citizen advisory committee, the member shall subscribe and file
his or her official oath of office with the City Clerk.
(Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983; Ord. MC-1454, passed 2-7-2018)
§ 2.17.060 CHAIRPERSON - MEETINGS - ABSENCES.
   (A)   Each board, commission and citizen advisory committee shall elect a
chair and vice-chair from among its members, and the Chair and Vice-Chair shall
serve for a term of one year. The board, commission or citizen advisory
committee shall meet not less than once a quarter in the City Hall, or such
other place within the city as the board, commission or citizen advisory
committee may select.
   (B)   If a member of any board, commission or citizen advisory committee
fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings without excuse from the
Chair, which excuse must be obtained within five calendar days before or after
any meeting date, he or she shall automatically cease to be a member of the
board, commission or citizen advisory committee, and the Chair of such board,
commission or citizen advisory committee shall notify the former member and the
nominating official of the declared vacancy. The vacant office shall be filled
by nomination and appointment made in the manner of the original appointment.
   (C)   Meetings of each board, commission or citizen advisory committee shall
be open to the public and shall be governed by the provisions of the Ralph M.
Brown Act, Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 54950.5 et seq.
(Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983; Ord. MC-1454, passed 2-7-2018)
§ 2.17.070 QUORUM.
   Any five members in attendance at any meeting shall constitute a quorum.
(Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983; Ord. MC-1454, passed 2-7-2018)
§ 2.17.080 REPORTING.
   Each board, commission or citizen advisory committee shall provide a copy of
its agenda, attachments and minutes to the Mayor, City Council, City Manager,
City Attorney and such other city officials as it may deem advisable.
(Ord. MC-803, passed 8-8-1991; Ord. MC-1454, passed 2-7-2018)
§ 2.17.090 HEARING OFFICERS; POWERS; ABSENCE OF QUORUM.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1454, passed 2-7-2018)
§ 2.17.100 HEARING OFFICERS; POWERS; REFERRALS.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1454, passed 2-7-2018)
§ 2.17.110 HEARING OFFICERS; APPEALS OF DECISION.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1454, passed 2-7-2018)
CHAPTER 2.18: PARKS, RECREATION AND COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1458, passed 2-21-2018)
CHAPTER 2.19: ELECTED OFFICIAL COMPENSATION ADVISORY COMMISSION
Section
   
2.19.010   Purpose
   
2.19.020   Members - appointment
   
2.19.030   Duties
   
2.19.040   Meetings
§ 2.19.010 PURPOSE.
   The elected official compensation advisory commission is established to
provide the Mayor and Council members with recommendations regarding
compensation to be established for city-elected officials on a periodic basis
as provided for herein.
(Ord. MC-1352, passed 6-21-2011; Ord. MC-1463, passed 2-21-2018)
§ 2.19.020 MEMBERS - APPOINTMENT.
   The City Elected Official Compensation Advisory Commission shall consist of
nine members who shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council.
Members shall be appointed and serve pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 2.17.
(Ord. MC-1352, passed 6-21-2011; Ord. MC-1463, passed 2-21-2018)
§ 2.19.030 DUTIES.
   The Elected Official Compensation Advisory Commission shall:
   (A)   Serve in an advisory capacity to the Mayor and City Council in making
recommendations relating to the compensation of city-elected officials;
   (B)   Conduct a compensation survey of city-elected officials in other state
charter and/or general law cities;
   (C)   Review California Government Code provisions for compensation of city-
elected officials of general law cities;
   (D)   Provide compensation recommendations to the Mayor and City Council
pursuant to the City Charter, §
305; and
   (E)   Encourage public participation in the process.
(Ord. MC-1352, passed 6-21-2011; Ord. MC-1463, passed 2-21-2018)
§ 2.19.040 MEETINGS.
   The Elected Official Compensation Advisory Commission shall hold meetings
and shall function pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 2.17 except that the meetings shall be held solely upon request for
compensation review by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-1352, passed 6-21-2011; Ord. MC-1463, passed 2-21-2018)
CHAPTER 2.20: SPECIAL COUNSEL SERVICES
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1498, passed 7-5-2018)
CHAPTER 2.22: PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
   
2.22.010   Members - appointment
   
2.22.020   Duties
   
2.22.030   Quorum and vote required
   
2.22.040   Reserved
   
2.22.050   Reserved
   
2.22.060   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   For provision on city planning, see Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 65100 et seq.
    For provisions on city planning commissions, see Cal. Gov’t Code, § 65101
§ 2.22.010 MEMBERS - APPOINTMENT.
   The City Planning Commission shall consist of nine members who shall serve
at the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council. Members shall be appointed and
serve pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 2.17. Members shall be appointed on the basis of demonstrated knowledge
and experience in land use, zoning, architecture, engineering, planning or
other relevant area.
(Ord. 1815, passed 2-27-1948; Ord. 3216, passed 12-21-1971; Ord. MC-277, passed
6-8-1983; Ord. MC-1473, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 2.22.020 DUTIES.
   The Commission shall perform the duties and functions prescribed in Title 19
and other ordinances. The Commission shall prepare, adopt and periodically
review and revise a comprehensive long-term general plan for the physical
development of the city and any land outside the boundaries thereof which in
the Commission’s judgment bears relation to the planning or development of the
city itself. Such plans shall be known as the general plan and shall be so
prepared that all or portions thereof may be adopted by the City Council as a
basis for the development of the city for such reasonable period of time next
ensuing after the adoption thereof as may be practicably covered thereby.
(Ord. 1815, passed 2-27-1948; Ord. 2812, passed 4-18-1967; Ord. 3126, passed
12-1-1970; Ord. MC-127, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983; Ord. MC-
1473, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 2.22.030 QUORUM AND VOTE REQUIRED.
   Five members of the City Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business. Action granting approval of any matter, except
general plan amendments, and amendments to the municipal code, must be taken by
a majority vote of Commissioners in attendance, and a failure to do so results
in an automatic denial of the pending matter. A recommendation for approval of
a general plan amendment or an amendment to the municipal code shall be by the
affirmative vote of not less than a majority (five) of the total membership of
the Commission. Procedural matters may be dealt with by a majority of those
voting and not abstaining at such times when a quorum is present. The absence
(temporary or permanent) of any Commissioner previously recorded as present
shall be noted in the minutes for purposes of determining the presence of a
quorum at all times.
(Ord. MC-1473, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 2.22.040 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983)
§ 2.22.050 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1473, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 2.22.060 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983)
CHAPTER 2.23: HISTORICAL PRESERVATION COMMISSION
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1460, passed 2-21-2018)
CHAPTER 2.24: CENTRAL CITY PARKING PLACE COMMISSION
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1352, passed 6-21-2011)
CHAPTER 2.26: ANIMAL CONTROL COMMISSION
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1468, passed 3-7-2018)
CHAPTER 2.27: LIBRARY BOARD
Section
   
2.27.010   Qualifications and appointment
   
2.27.020   Terms of office
   
2.27.030   Oath of office
   
2.27.040   Meetings, Chair, quorum and attendance
   
2.27.050   Reporting
   
2.27.060   Approval of rules and regulations
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was added by Ord. MC-1483, passed 4-18-2018.
§ 2.27.010 QUALIFICATIONS AND APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   The five members of the Library Board of Trustees serving at the time
of the effective date of the ordinance incorporated in this chapter shall
continue to serve until a replacement member is appointed, subject to the Mayor
and City Council’s right of removal. Whenever any vacancy of the Board occurs
for any reason, and at least 60 days prior to expiration of any Library Board
of Trustee member’s term of office, the City Clerk shall cause notice of the
vacancy or pending vacancy of the position to be posted and advertised as
required by law to enable qualified candidates to apply for such position(s).
   (B)   Applicants for membership on the Library Board of Trustees and all
Board members shall be adult residents and registered voters of the city, and
no member shall be an employee of the city or hold any other elected office in
the city, while applying for or holding a membership seat on the Library Board
of Trustees. Members shall be appointed on the basis of demonstrated knowledge
and experience in the area of library operations, fundraising, budget and
personnel management, education, legal services, purchasing or other areas
which relate to the mission and purpose of the Board. Members shall commit to
provide the best possible library services for the community. Appointments
shall be made with consideration of community involvement, interpersonal and
communication skills, geographical distribution of commissioners and diversity.
The Mayor shall determine the timing and manner of interviewing qualified
applicants, which may include interviews with the Mayor, an ad hoc council
subcommittee formed for that purpose, or setting of a special meeting with
public interviews of those selected for interview. Each appointee to the
Library Board shall be selected by a vote of the Mayor and entire City Council
as provided in City Charter, §
304(b). Removal of any member of the Library Board shall also be subject to
City Charter, §
304(b). Members of the Library Board of Trustees shall serve without
compensation.
(Ord. MC-1483, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 2.27.020 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   Each member of the Library Board of Trustees shall serve a four-year term.
Terms shall be staggered so that three members are appointed in 2018 for a
four-year term and every four years thereafter, and two members are appointed
in 2018 for a two-year term and every four years thereafter. The term of each
member of the Board shall continue until a successor has been appointed.
(Ord. MC-1483, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 2.27.030 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Prior to undertaking his or her duties as a member of the Library Board of
Trustees, the member shall subscribe and file his or her official oath of
office with the City Clerk.
(Ord. MC-1483, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 2.27.040 MEETINGS, CHAIR, QUORUM AND ATTENDANCE.
   The Library Board of Trustees shall meet at least once per month, with
regular meetings scheduled by adopted rules or regulations, and special
meetings as needed, to be posted and conducted in accordance with the Ralph M.
Brown Act. A quorum of three of the Board members is required to conduct any
meeting. The Board shall elect a president and vice president from among its
members, and the president and vice president shall serve for a term of two
years. Any member who is absent for three consecutive meetings, or in excess of
four meetings per year, excused or unexcused, may be subject to removal from
the Board.
(Ord. MC-1483, passed 4-18-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Ralph M. Brown Act, see Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 54950 through 54963
§ 2.27.050 REPORTING.
   The Library Board of Trustees shall provide a copy of its agenda,
attachments and minutes to the Mayor, City Council, City Manager, City Attorney
and such other city officials as it may deem advisable. The Library Board of
Trustees shall schedule from time to time agenda items as requested by the City
Manager for the purpose of discussing items in closed or open session. The
Library Department budget and all labor agreements shall be submitted to City
Council for approval pursuant to City Charter, §§
508 and
602.
(Ord. MC-1483, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 2.27.060 APPROVAL OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The rules and regulations of the Library Board of Trustees in effect at the
time of adoption of the ordinance incorporated in this chapter, copies of which
rules and regulations are on file in the office of the City Clerk, are approved
for enforcement purposes. Subsequent amendments to the rules and regulations
approved by the Library Board shall be submitted to the City Council for
approval by resolution and shall be enforceable pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1483, passed 4-18-2018)
CHAPTER 2.28: BOARD OF WATER COMMISSIONERS
Section
   
2.28.010   Approval of rules and regulations
   
2.28.020   Violation - penalty
   
2.28.030   Service outside city limits
   
2.28.040   Water rates approval by Council resolution
Cross-reference:
   For Charter provisions on the Board of Water Commissioners, see City
Charter, Art. VI
§ 2.28.010 APPROVAL OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Pursuant to the City Charter, §
603, the Water Board is responsible for oversight and management of the city’s
water supply, recycled water, wastewater collection and treatment functions.
Specifically, in accordance with City Charter, §
603(h), the Water Board is empowered to establish and periodically review and
revise such rules and regulations as may be appropriate for managing the city’s
water supply, recycled water, wastewater collection and treatment functions.
(Ord. 1872, passed 12-6-1949; Ord. 3556, passed 2-18-1976; Ord. 3665, passed 9-
2-1977; Ord. 3688, passed 11-9-1977; Ord. 3708, passed 3-2-1978; Ord. 3732,
passed 6-16-1978; Ord. MC-15, passed 12-9-1980; Ord. MC-175, passed 6-28-1982;
Ord. MC-1562, passed 9-15-2021)
§ 2.28.020 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any of such
rules or regulations, and any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other
entity violating any such rule or regulation is guilty of an infraction, which,
upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010. In addition, notwithstanding any language to the contrary in
Chapter 9.92, such violations may be enforced through the administrative
citation process set forth in
Chapter 9.92. Furthermore, notwithstanding any language to the contrary in
Chapter 9.93 and where appropriate at the discretion of the city’s officials,
such violations may be enforced.
(Ord. 1872, passed 12-6-1949; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1562,
passed 9-15-2021)
§ 2.28.030 SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   Water and sewer service outside the corporate limits of the city shall not
be authorized or approved by the Board of Water Commissioners or its officers,
employees and agents, except with the approval of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-106, passed 10-7-1981)
§ 2.28.040 WATER RATES APPROVAL BY COUNCIL RESOLUTION.
   Water rates and charges established by the Board of Water Commissioners may
be approved by resolution of the Mayor and City Council. Failure of the Mayor
and City Council to act by the adoption of a resolution or ordinance within 90
days after the establishment of such water rates and charges shall be deemed an
automatic approval of such water rates and charges.
(Ord. MC-174, passed 6-29-1982)
CHAPTER 2.30: FINE ARTS COMMISSION
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1458, passed 2-21-2018)
CHAPTER 2.31: RELOCATION APPEALS BOARD
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1459, passed 2-21-2018)
CHAPTER 2.32: BOARD OF FIRE COMMISSIONERS
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1422, passed 5-16-2016)
Cross-reference:
   Fire Department, see
Chapter 2.12
Editor’s note:
   On July 1, 2016, the city annexed into the County Fire Protection District.
The County Fire Code, and other ordinances, were ratified by the Mayor and City
Council pursuant to Ord. MC-1422, passed 5-16-2016.
CHAPTER 2.34: BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1471, passed 3-7-2018)
CHAPTER 2.36: PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING
Section
   
2.36.010   Intent to qualify
   
2.36.020   Adherence to standards
   
2.36.030   Inquiries by the Commission
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on peace officer standards and training and funds therefor,
see Cal. Penal Code, §§ 13520 et seq.
§ 2.36.010 INTENT TO QUALIFY.
   The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state
under the provisions of the Cal. Penal Code, Part 4, Title 4, Chapter 1.
(Ord. 2400, passed 11-28-1961)
§ 2.36.020 ADHERENCE TO STANDARDS.
   Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code, §§ 13522, 13525 and 13510(c) of said Chapter 1,
the city, while receiving aid from the state pursuant to said Chapter 1, will
adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the State
Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training.
(Ord. 2400, passed 11-28-1961; Ord. MC-661, passed 6-7-1989)
§ 2.36.030 INQUIRIES BY THE COMMISSION.
   Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code, § 13512 of said Chapter 1, the Commission and
its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the
Commission to ascertain that the city’s public safety dispatcher personnel
adhere to standards for selection and training established by the Commission on
Peace Officer Standards and Training.
(Ord. MC-661, passed 6-7-1989)
CHAPTER 2.38: POLICE RESERVE
Section
   
2.38.010   Establishment
   
2.38.020   Authority and control of Chief of Police
   
2.38.030   Membership - method of appointment
   
2.38.040   Rules and regulations - duties
   
2.38.050   Workers’ compensation benefits
   
2.38.060   Identification card and insignia
   
2.38.070   Removal from membership
   
2.38.080   Firearms and police baton
   
2.38.090   Power of arrest - authority to direct traffic
   
2.38.100   Uniform - use of uniform
   
2.38.110   Civil defense and disaster
   
2.38.120   Impersonation prohibited
§ 2.38.010 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A police reserve, hereinafter called “reserves,” is established as a
voluntary organization composed of persons appointed by the Chief of Police,
hereinafter called the “Chief;” said persons shall serve gratuitously as a
volunteer unit of the City Police Department to assist regular police officers
in law enforcement and the maintenance of peace and order.
(Ord. 2828, passed 6-27-1967)
§ 2.38.020 AUTHORITY AND CONTROL OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the Chief of Police shall have
complete control and authority over the reserves. He or she may appoint, as
members thereof, any persons whom he or she deems to be qualified and he or she
may reject any application for membership. He or she shall provide for the
training of members in all fields of police activity and for that purpose may
assign such members to various police duties.
(Ord. 2828, passed 6-27-1967)
§ 2.38.030 MEMBERSHIP - METHOD OF APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   Membership in the reserves is open to both men and women. Whenever the
male gender is used in this chapter, it shall be construed to include both male
and female.
   (B)   No person shall become a member of the reserves until he or she is
able to meet all requirements prescribed by the Chief. When so qualified and
selected, he or she shall be sworn in by the Chief, or by the Chief’s
representative, as a member of the reserves.
(Ord. 2828, passed 6-27-1967)
§ 2.38.040 RULES AND REGULATIONS - DUTIES.
   The Chief may, by order, establish rules and regulations to govern the
reserves, including the fixing of specific duties of its members and the
providing of penalties and discipline for violations of such duties or orders
of the Chief. He or she may change such orders from time to time.
(Ord. 2828, passed 6-27-1967)
§ 2.38.050 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS.
   The members of the city police reserve shall receive workers’ compensation
benefits as provided by law. For purposes of the Workers’ Compensation Law,
members of the police reserve shall be deemed to be employees of the city.
(Ord. 2828, passed 6-27-1967)
Statutory reference:
   Workers’ Compensation Law, see Cal. Labor Code, §§ 3200 et seq.
§ 2.38.060 IDENTIFICATION CARD AND INSIGNIA.
   An identification card, badge or such other insignia or evidence of
identification as the Chief may prescribe shall be issued to each member who
shall carry such card at all times. Each member must surrender all city
property issued to him or her upon termination of his or her membership.
(Ord. 2828, passed 6-27-1967)
§ 2.38.070 REMOVAL FROM MEMBERSHIP.
   The membership of any person in the reserves may be terminated by the Chief
at his or her pleasure.
(Ord. 2828, passed 6-27-1967)
§ 2.38.080 FIREARMS AND POLICE BATON.
   No member of the reserves shall carry any firearms unless or until he or she
has been authorized to do so by the Chief. All members of the reserves are
authorized to carry the regulation police baton.
(Ord. 2828, passed 6-27-1967)
§ 2.38.090 POWER OF ARREST - AUTHORITY TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   A member of the reserves, when on duty as assigned by the Chief, shall have
the authority given to officers of the Police Department to direct traffic, and
shall have the same power of arrest granted to a regular member of the Police
Department, subject to any limitations which the Chief may impose.
(Ord. 2828, passed 6-27-1967)
§ 2.38.100 UNIFORM - USE OF UNIFORM.
   The uniform for members of the reserves shall be similar to the uniform worn
by regular members of the Police Department, with an identifying insignia to be
prescribed by the Chief of Police. The uniform shall be worn only at times
authorized by the Chief.
(Ord. 2828, passed 6-27-1967)
§ 2.38.110 CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER.
   Members of the reserves shall also enroll as volunteers of the City Civil
Defense and Disaster Organization.
(Ord. 2828, passed 6-27-1967)
§ 2.38.120 IMPERSONATION PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful and an infraction, punishable in accordance with §
1.12.010, for any person, not a member of the reserves:
   (A)   To wear, carry or display a reserve identification card, badge, cap
piece or insignia; and
   (B)   In any manner to represent himself or herself to be connected with the
reserves.
(Ord. 2828, passed 6-27-1967; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1220,
passed 3-20-2006)
CHAPTER 2.39: HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1471, passed 3-7-2018)
CHAPTER 2.40: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1459, passed 2-21-2018)
CHAPTER 2.41: MAIN STREET ADVISORY BOARD
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1190, passed 11-2-2004)
CHAPTER 2.42: COMMUNITY TELEVISION COMMISSION
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1352, passed 6-21-2011)
CHAPTER 2.43: BUREAU OF FRANCHISES
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018)
CHAPTER 2.44: CEMETERY COMMISSION
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1190, passed 11-2-2004)
CHAPTER 2.45: BUILDING APPEALS BOARD
Section
   
2.45.010   Members - appointment
   
2.45.020   Reserved
   
2.45.030   Duties
   
2.45.040   Review of the Board’s decision
   
2.45.050   Oath of office
   
2.45.060   Chair - meetings
   
2.45.070   Quorum
   
2.45.080   Hearing procedures
§ 2.45.010 MEMBERS - APPOINTMENT.
   The Building Appeals Board shall be comprised of the members of the City
Planning Commission, as defined in §
2.22.010. Members shall be appointed on a basis of knowledge in the applicable
building codes, regulations and ordinances of the city, and must be qualified
by training and experience to pass on matters pertaining to building
construction.
(Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983; Ord. MC-1474, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1521,
passed 9-18-2019)
§ 2.45.020 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Ord. MC-1474, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 2.45.030 DUTIES.
   Pursuant to § 1.8.8 of the State Building Code, being 24 Cal. Code of
Regulations, Chapter 1, Part 2, Division 1, § 1.8.8, the Board shall have the
duty to consider appeals of orders, decisions and determinations of the city
Building Official relating to the building standards of the State Building
Standards Code. The Board is authorized to establish policies and procedures
necessary to carry out its duties.
(Ord. MC-1474, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 2.45.040 REVIEW OF THE BOARD’S DECISION.
   The decision of the Board may be appealed to the City Council in accordance
with
Chapter 2.64. The City Council’s decision on an appeal from the Board’s
decision is final and binding. Pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, §§
1094.5 and 1094.6, any action to review a decision of the City Council shall be
commenced not later than the ninetieth day after the date the City Council’s
order is adopted.
(Ord. MC-1474, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 2.45.050 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Prior to undertaking his or her duties as a member of the Board, the member
shall subscribe and file his or her official oath of office with the City
Clerk.
(Ord. MC-1474, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 2.45.060 CHAIR - MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Chairperson of the Board shall be the Chairperson of the Planning
Commission, or his or her designee. The Board shall meet only as required to
consider an appeal within its jurisdiction.
   (B)   The Board shall meet at such times and dates, and in such places, as
shall be designated by the Chairperson of the Board.
   (C)   Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and shall be
governed by the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act, Cal. Gov’t Code, §§
54950.5 et seq., except as otherwise provided by law.
   (D)   A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal,
professional or financial interest.
(Ord. MC-1474, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 2.45.070 QUORUM.
   Any five members in attendance at any meeting shall constitute a quorum.
(Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983; Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1474,
passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 2.45.080 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Board shall meet upon notice from the Chairperson.
   (B)   The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the Building Official,
the Building Official’s representative and any person whose interests are
affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
   (C)   The Board shall adopt and make available to the public procedures
under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require
compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant
information be received.
   (D)   A quorum of the Board shall hear an appeal.
   (E)   The Board may modify or reverse the decision of the Building Official
by a concurring vote of a majority of its members. The authority of the Board
to render a decision is limited to the scope of authority of the Building
Official in the first instance. The Board has no authority to waive a
requirement of the State Building Standards Code.
   (F)   The Board must issue a written decision with findings within a
reasonably prompt time after filing of the appeal.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
CHAPTER 2.46: DISASTER COUNCIL
Section
   
2.46.010   Purpose
   
2.46.020   Definition
   
2.46.030   Disaster Council membership
   
2.46.040   Disaster Council powers and duties
   
2.46.050   Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services
   
2.46.060   Office of Emergency Management
   
2.46.070   Standardized emergency management system
   
2.46.080   National incident management system
   
2.46.090   Powers and duties of the Director and Assistant Director of
Emergency Services
   
2.46.100   Emergency organization
   
2.46.110   Expenditures
   
2.46.120   Violations
   
2.46.130   Excessive price increases prohibited
§ 2.46.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the preparation and execution
of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in the
event of an emergency. This chapter shall provide for the direction of the
emergency organization and the coordination of the emergency functions with all
other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons
and entities.
(Ord. MC-1514U, passed 2-20-2019; Ord. MC-1515, passed 3-6-2019)
§ 2.46.020 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY. The actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or
of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this jurisdiction
caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, civil
unrest or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from
war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor
controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the
services, personnel, equipment and facilities of the city, requiring the
combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.
(Ord. MC-1514U, passed 2-20-2019; Ord. MC-1515, passed 3-6-2019)
§ 2.46.030 DISASTER COUNCIL MEMBERSHIP.
   The City Disaster Council is created and shall consist of the following:
   (A)   The Mayor, who shall be Chair;
   (B)   The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be Vice Chair;
   (C)   The Assistant Director of Emergency Services;
   (D)   Such Chiefs of Emergency Service as may be provided for in a current
emergency plan of the city adopted pursuant to this chapter; and
   (E)   Such other representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans,
professional or other organizations having an official emergency
responsibility, as may be appointed by the Director with the advice and consent
of the City Council.
(Ord. MC-1514U, passed 2-20-2019; Ord. MC-1515, passed 3-6-2019)
§ 2.46.040 DISASTER COUNCIL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Disaster Council shall meet at least once per year, upon the call of the
Chair or, in the absence of the Chair, upon the call of the Vice Chair. It
shall be the duty of the Disaster Council and it is empowered to develop and
recommend for adoption by the Mayor and City Council, the city’s emergency
plan, mutual aid plans, agreements, ordinances, resolutions, rules and
regulations as may be necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The
city’s emergency plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the
city’s resources, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a
local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency and shall provide
for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency
organization. Such plan shall take effect upon the adoption of a resolution by
the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-1514U, passed 2-20-2019; Ord. MC-1515, passed 3-6-2019)
§ 2.46.050 DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES.
   (A)   There is created the position of director of emergency services. The
City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services.
   (B)   There is created the position of assistant director of emergency
services, who shall be appointed by the Director. When the Director of
Emergency Services is not available, the Assistant Director of Emergency
Services shall become Acting Director and assume the powers and duties of the
Director.
(Ord. MC-1514U, passed 2-20-2019; Ord. MC-1515, passed 3-6-2019)
§ 2.46.060 OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
   There is created the office of emergency management, which shall act at the
will of the Director of Emergency Services. The City Emergency Manager shall
manage the day-to-day affairs of the emergency management program and have
certain other emergency management functions as specified.
(Ord. MC-1514U, passed 2-20-2019; Ord. MC-1515, passed 3-6-2019)
§ 2.46.070 STANDARDIZED EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.
   In accordance with the Cal. Gov’t Code, § 8607, the city adopts the
standardized emergency management system (“SEMS”) framework. The SEMS framework
includes the use of the incident command system (“ICS”), multi-agency or
interagency coordination, participation in the master mutual aid agreement and
operational area concept.
(Ord. MC-1514U, passed 2-20-2019; Ord. MC-1515, passed 3-6-2019)
§ 2.46.080 NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.
   In accordance with Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5 (February 28,
2003), the city adopts the national incident management system (“NIMS”)
framework. The NIMS framework includes the use of the standardized emergency
management system and the incident command system, multi-agency or interagency
coordination, participation in the master mutual aid agreement and the
operational area concept.
(Ord. MC-1514U, passed 2-20-2019; Ord. MC-1515, passed 3-6-2019)
§ 2.46.090 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF
EMERGENCY SERVICES.
   (A)   The Director is empowered to:
      (1)   Request the Mayor and City Council to proclaim the existence or
threatened existence of a “local emergency,” if the City Council is in session,
or to issue such proclamation, if the City Council is not in session. Whenever
a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the Mayor and City Council
shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or
the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;
      (2)   Request the Governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in
the opinion of the Director, the circumstances are beyond the city’s capacity
to adequately respond to or recover from the emergency;
      (3)   Control and direct the efforts of the city’s emergency organization
for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;
      (4)   Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff
of this emergency organization and resolve questions of authority and
responsibility that may arise between them;
      (5)   Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies
on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein; and
      (6)   In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as herein
provided, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the
existence of a “state of war emergency,” the Director is further empowered:
         (a)   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency;
provided, however, that such rules and regulations are confirmed at the
earliest practicable time by the City Council;
         (b)   To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties
found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind
the jurisdiction for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to
commandeer the same for public use;
         (c)   To require emergency services of any officer or employee and, in
the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the county or the
existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many
residents of the city as may be necessary in the execution of duties; provided
that all such persons are given all privileges, benefits and immunities as are
provided by state law for registered disaster services workers;
         (d)   To requisition necessary personnel or material of the
departments or agencies; and
         (e)   To execute all ordinary power as City Manager; all of the
special powers conferred by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan
adopted pursuant to this chapter; all powers conferred by any statute, by any
agreement approved by the Mayor and City Council and by any other lawful
authority.
   (B)   The Director shall designate the order of succession to that office,
to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and
otherwise perform duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be
approved by the City Council.
   (C)   The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the Director
and with the assistance of the Chiefs of Emergency Services, develop emergency
plans, manage the emergency programs of the city and have such other powers and
duties as may be assigned to him or her by the Director.
(Ord. MC-1514U, passed 2-20-2019; Ord. MC-1515, passed 3-6-2019)
§ 2.46.100 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION.
   All officers and employees, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to
aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who
may, by agreement or by operation of law, including persons impressed into
service under the provisions of this chapter, be charged with duties incident
to the protection of life and property in the city during such emergency, shall
constitute the emergency organization of the city.
(Ord. MC-1514U, passed 2-20-2019; Ord. MC-1515, passed 3-6-2019)
§ 2.46.110 EXPENDITURES.
   Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including
mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct
protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city.
(Ord. MC-1514U, passed 2-20-2019; Ord. MC-1515, passed 3-6-2019)
§ 2.46.120 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by
imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, for any person to, during an
emergency:
   (A)   Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency
organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or
her by virtue of this chapter;
   (B)   Commit any act or omission forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation
issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act or omission is of such nature as
to give assistance to the enemy or imperil the lives or property of the
inhabitants of the city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or
protection thereof; and
   (C)   Wear, carry or display without proper authority any means of
identification specified by the emergency agency of the state.
(Ord. MC-1514U, passed 2-20-2019; Ord. MC-1515, passed 3-6-2019)
§ 2.46.130 EXCESSIVE PRICE INCREASES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Upon the proclamation of a state of emergency resulting from an
earthquake, flood, fire, civil unrest, storm or natural or human-made disaster
declared by the President of the United States or the Governor, or upon the
declaration of a local emergency resulting from an earthquake, flood, fire,
civil unrest, storm or natural or human-made disaster, and for a period of 30
days following such proclamation or declaration, it shall be unlawful for any
person, contractor, business or other entity to sell or offer to sell any
consumer food items or goods, goods or services used for emergency cleanup,
emergency supplies or medical supplies, home heating oil, building materials,
housing, transportation, freight and storage services or gasoline or other
motor fuels for an amount that exceeds 10% of the price charged by such person
immediately prior to the proclamation or declaration of emergency; provided,
however, that this prohibition shall not apply upon demonstration that the
increase in price is directly attributable to additional costs imposed by the
supplier of the goods or additional costs of providing such goods or services
during the state of emergency and the price represents no more than 10% above
the total of the cost to the seller, plus the markup customarily applied by the
seller for such goods or services in the usual course of business immediately
prior to the onset of the state of emergency.
   (B)   Upon the proclamation of a state of emergency resulting from an
earthquake, flood, civil unrest or storm declared by the President of the
United States or the Governor, or upon the declaration of a local emergency
resulting from an earthquake, flood, fire, civil unrest or storm, and for a
period of 180 days following such proclamation or declaration, it shall be
unlawful for a contractor to sell, or offer to sell, any repair or
reconstruction services or any services used in emergency cleanup for a price
of more than 10% above the price charged by that person for those services
immediately prior to the proclamation or declaration of emergency. However, a
greater price increase shall not be unlawful if that person can demonstrate
that the increase in price is directly attributable to the additional costs
imposed by the contractor’s supplier or to the additional costs of providing
the service during the state of emergency and the price represents no more than
10% above the total of the cost to the contractor, plus the markup customarily
applied by the contractor for such goods or services in the usual course of
business immediately prior to the onset of the state of emergency.
   (C)   Upon the proclamation of a state of emergency resulting from an
earthquake, flood, fire, civil unrest, storm or other natural disaster declared
by the President of the United States or the Governor, or upon the declaration
of a local emergency resulting from an earthquake, flood, fire, civil unrest,
storm or other natural or human-made disaster, and for a period of 30 days
following such proclamation or declaration, it shall be unlawful for the owner
or operate of a hotel or motel to increase the hotel or motel’s regular rates,
as advertised immediately prior to the proclamation or declaration of
emergency, by more than 10%. However, a greater price increase shall not be
unlawful if the owner or operator can demonstrate that the increase in price is
directly attributable to the additional costs imposed on him or her for goods
or labor used in his or her business, to seasonal adjustments in rates that are
regularly scheduled or to previously contracted rates.
   (D)   The provisions of this section may be extended for an additional 30-
day period by the Mayor and City Council if such extension is deemed necessary
to protect the lives, property or welfare of the residents of the city.
(Ord. MC-1514U, passed 2-20-2019; Ord. MC-1515, passed 3-6-2019)
CHAPTER 2.47: CENTRAL CITY ADVISORY BOARD
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1190, passed 11-2-2004)
CHAPTER 2.48: STATE EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Section
   
2.48.010   Authorization of contract
   
2.48.020   Authority of Mayor to execute contract
Statutory reference:
   For provisions authorizing a city to contract with the public employees’
retirement system, see Cal. Gov’t Code, § 45345
   For provisions on the public employees’ retirement system generally, see
Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 20000 et seq.
§ 2.48.010 AUTHORIZATION OF CONTRACT.
   A contract is authorized between the Mayor and City Council and the Board of
Administration, state employees’ retirement system; a copy of said contract is
attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and marked Exhibit A, and by
such reference made a part hereof as though herein set out in full.
(Ord. 1734, passed 2-6-1945)
§ 2.48.020 AUTHORITY OF MAYOR TO EXECUTE CONTRACT.
   The Mayor of the city is authorized, empowered and directed to execute said
contract for and on behalf of said agency.
(Ord. 1734, passed 2-6-1945)
CHAPTER 2.49: SENIOR AFFAIRS COMMISSION
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1458, passed 2-21-2018)
CHAPTER 2.50: PERSONNEL COMMISSION
Section
   
2.50.010   Establishment
   
2.50.020   Appeals from disciplinary action
   
2.50.030   Secretary to the Personnel Commission
   
2.50.040   Election of officers
   
2.50.050   Time and place of meetings
§ 2.50.010 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Personnel Commission as established in City Charter, §
604 shall replace the Civil Service Board, which is dissolved.
(Ord. 2449, passed 7-24-1962; Ord. 3074, passed 6-2-1970; Ord. 3150, passed 3-
2-1971; Ord. 3226, passed 1-4-1972; Ord. 3313, passed 12-7-1972; Ord. 3363,
passed 8-9-1973; Ord. 3526, passed 9-10-1975; Ord. 3551, passed 2-4-1976; Ord.
3676, passed 10-4-1977; Ord. MC-230, passed 12-21-1982; Ord. MC-324, passed 12-
6-1983; Ord. MC-631, passed 7-6-1988; Ord. MC-1447, passed 6-7-2017)
§ 2.50.020 APPEALS FROM DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
   Pursuant to City Charter, §
604, the Personnel Commission shall hear appeals from disciplinary actions
filed by city employees in the classified service, subject to the provisions of
the applicable labor agreement, if any, and the personnel rules and
regulations, formerly known as the civil service rules and regulations, as
adopted by resolution of the Mayor and City Council and as they may be amended
from time to time. The determination of the Personnel Commission on such
appeals shall be final.
(Ord. 2449, passed 7-24-1962; Ord. MC-1447, passed 6-7-2017)
§ 2.50.030 SECRETARY TO THE PERSONNEL COMMISSION.
   The administrative services officer, or such other person as may be
designated by the City Manager, shall serve as Secretary to the Personnel
Commission, and shall be responsible for posting and mailing any necessary
hearing notices, issuing subpoenas for hearings before the Personnel Commission
and keeping a record of the proceedings. The Personnel Commission’s power of
subpoena over persons and records shall be enforceable by the courts. The City
Manager shall ensure that the Personnel Commission is provided with such
support as may be necessary to conduct appeal hearings as required, including a
legal advisor as may be necessary.
(Ord. MC-1447, passed 6-7-2017)
§ 2.50.040 ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
   The Commission shall annually elect one of its members as chair and one as
vice chair.
(Ord. MC-1447, passed 6-7-2017)
§ 2.50.050 TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS.
   The Commission shall hold regularly noticed meetings as required to hear
disciplinary appeals, and may hold special meetings at the call of the Chair or
a majority of the members of the Commission.
(Ord. MC-1447, passed 6-7-2017)
CHAPTER 2.52: CITY HALL
Section
   
2.52.010   Hours of business
§ 2.52.010 HOURS OF BUSINESS.
   The City Hall shall be open to the public for the transaction of business
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. daily, except on Saturdays,
Sundays and those city holidays designated by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council.
(Ord. 2135, passed 8-21-1956; Ord. 3541, passed 11-26-1975; Ord. 3921, passed
2-25-1980)
CHAPTER 2.54: HOLIDAYS
Section
   
2.54.010   Saturday
Statutory reference:
   For provisions authorizing cities to declare Saturdays as holidays as
respects the transaction of government business, see Cal. Gov’t Code, § 6704
§ 2.54.010 SATURDAY.
   In accordance with the provisions of the Cal. Gov’t Code, § 6704, it is
declared and provided that every Saturday is a holiday as respects the
transaction of business in the public offices of the city, excepting that such
provisions shall not be applicable to the Water, Police or Fire Departments or
the essential public services rendered by said departments.
(Ord. 1811, passed 10-7-1947; Ord. MC-1220, passed 3-20-2006)
CHAPTER 2.55: LOCAL CAMPAIGN FINANCE REGULATIONS
Section
   
2.55.010   Pay-to-play restrictions
   
2.55.020   Enforcement
   
2.55.030   Campaign contribution limits to city elective office candidates
§ 2.55.010 PAY-TO-PLAY RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CONTRIBUTION. Includes contributions to candidates and committees in
federal, state or local elections.
      ELECTED OFFICIAL. Any elected official of the city, including the Mayor
and all City Council members.
      LICENSE, PERMIT, CONTRACT or OTHER ENTITLEMENT FOR USE. All business,
professional, trade and land use licenses and permits and all other
entitlements for use, including all entitlements for land use, all contracts
(other than competitively bid, labor or personal employment contracts) and all
franchises.
      PARTICIPANT. Any person who is not a party but who actively supports or
opposes a particular decision in a proceeding involving a license, permit or
other entitlement for use and who has a financial interest in the decision, as
described in Cal. Gov’t Code, Title 9, Chapter 7, Article 1 (commencing with §
87100). A person actively supports or opposes a particular decision in a
proceeding if he or she lobbies in person the officers or employees of the
agency, testifies in person before the agency or otherwise acts to influence
officers of the agency.
      PARTY. Any person who files an application for, or is the subject of, a
proceeding involving a license, permit or other entitlement for use.
   (B)   Prohibition on soliciting and accepting certain contributions. No
elected official shall accept, solicit or direct a contribution of more than
$250 from any party, or his or her agent, or from any participant, or his or
her agent, while a proceeding involving a license, permit, contract or other
entitlement for use is pending before the city and for three months following
the date a final decision is rendered in the proceeding if the elected official
knows or has reason to know that the participant has a financial interest, as
that term is used in Cal. Gov’t Code, Title 9, Chapter 7, Article 1 (commencing
with § 87100). This prohibition shall apply regardless of whether the elected
official accepts, solicits or directs the contribution for himself or herself,
or on behalf of any other officer, or on behalf of any candidate for office or
on behalf of any committee.
   (C)   Elected official disclosure requirements. Prior to rendering any
decision in a proceeding involving a license, permit, contract or other
entitlement for use pending before the city, each elected official who received
a contribution since his or her last State Fair Political Practices Commission
(“FPPC”) Form 460 Filing (Recipient Committee Campaign Statement) in an amount
of more than $250 from a party or from any participant shall disclose that fact
on the record of the proceeding.
   (D)   Application to candidates. Contributions made to candidates for
elective office shall subject the candidate to the disclosure provision of
division (C) above should the candidate be subsequently elected. Candidates who
have become the Council Member-Elect or Mayor-Elect, but who have not yet been
sworn in, shall be subject to the prohibition of division (B) above.
   (E)   Applicant restrictions. A party to a proceeding before the city,
involving a license, permit, contract or other entitlement for use, shall
disclose on the record of the proceeding any contribution in an amount of more
than $250 made since their last FPPC Form 460 Filing (Recipient Committee
Campaign Statement) by the party, or his or her agent, to any elected official.
No party, or his or her agent, to a proceeding involving a license, permit or
other entitlement for use pending before the city and no participant, or his or
her agent, in the proceeding shall make a contribution of more than $250 to any
elected official during the proceeding and for three months following the date
a final decision is rendered by the city in the proceeding. When a closed
corporation is a party to, or a participant in, a proceeding involving a
license, permit or other entitlement for use pending before the city, the
majority shareholder is subject to the disclosure and prohibition requirements
herein.
(Ord. MC-1558, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 2.55.020 ENFORCEMENT.
   The city designates the California Fair Political Practices Commission
(“FPPC”) as the enforcement agency for this chapter. The city shall provide to
the FPPC twice, annually, data for all licenses, permits or other entitlements
for use, as defined in §
2.55.010. The FPPC will cross-reference the data received from the city against
the most recent FPPC Form 460 Filing (Recipient Committee Campaign Statement)
of each elected official who has received contributions equal to or exceeding
$2,000 as shown on the most recent FPPC Form 460 Filing. As set forth in Cal.
Gov’t Code, § 83116, the FPPC shall have prosecutorial discretion to enforce
this chapter and may discipline an elected official for violating this chapter,
including, but not limited to, requiring the elected official to pay a monetary
fine.
(Ord. MC-1558, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 2.55.030 CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION LIMITS TO CITY ELECTIVE OFFICE CANDIDATES.
   (A)   A person shall not make to a candidate for elective city office, and a
candidate for elective city office shall not accept from a person, a
contribution totaling more than $4,900.
   (B)   On January 1, 2023, and every odd-numbered year thereafter, the limit
set forth in division (A) above shall be adjusted to reflect any increase or
decrease in the Consumer Price Index in the same manner as the Fair Political
Practices Commission adjusts the limits under Cal. Gov’t Code, § 85301(d) or
any successor provision.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt any person from
complying with applicable provisions of any other laws of this state.
(Ord. MC-1573U, passed 2-16-2022)
CHAPTER 2.56: ELECTIONS
Section
   
2.56.001   Law governing municipal elections
   
2.56.010   Dates of election
   
2.56.020   Filing fee
   
2.56.030   Elections official
   
2.56.040   Results of primary election
   
2.56.050   Seating of officials elected
   
2.56.060   Filling a vacancy in the office of the Mayor
   
2.56.070   Filling a vacancy of a Council seat
   
2.56.080   Fiscal analysis of measure
   
2.56.090   Reserved
   
2.56.100   Reserved
   
2.56.105   Reserved
   
2.56.110   Reserved
   
2.56.120   Reserved
   
2.56.130   Reserved
   
2.56.140   Reserved
   
2.56.142   Reserved
   
2.56.143   Reserved
   
2.56.144   Reserved
   
2.56.146   Reserved
   
2.56.148   Reserved
   
2.56.150   Reserved
   
2.56.160   Reserved
   
2.56.170   Reserved
   
2.56.171   Reserved
   
2.56.173   Reserved
   
2.56.175   Reserved
   
2.56.180   Reserved
   
2.56.190   Reserved
   
2.56.195   Reserved
Cross-reference:
   For Charter provisions on elections, see Charter,
Arts. II and
VII
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on notice of elections, see Cal. Election Code, §§ 10100 et
seq.
§ 2.56.001 LAW GOVERNING MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   City elections shall follow the provisions and procedures of the California
Elections Code as applicable to general law cities, except as provided in the
Charter or in this chapter.
(Ord. MC-268, passed 4-26-1983; Ord. MC-476, passed 9-24-1985; Ord. MC-478,
passed 9-24-1985; Ord. MC-1318, passed 10-20-2009; Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-
2018)
§ 2.56.010 DATES OF ELECTION.
   (A)   Beginning in 2018, primary elections in the city shall be held in
consolidation with the statewide primary election. Beginning in 2020, primary
elections in the city shall be held in consolidation with the statewide primary
election and every two years thereafter.
   (B)   Beginning in 2018, general elections in the city shall be held in
consolidation with the statewide general election and every two years
thereafter.
   (C)   In 2018, and every four years thereafter, the following offices will
be elected and seated: Mayor, members of the City Council from the First Ward,
the Second Ward and the Fourth Ward.
   (D)   In 2020, and every four years thereafter, the following offices will
be elected and seated: members of the City Council from the Third Ward, the
Fifth Ward, the Sixth Ward and the Seventh Ward.
(Ord. 2048, passed 10-5-1954; Ord. 3448, passed 10-30-1974; Ord. 3601, passed
9-7-1976; Ord. MC-934, passed 3-9-1995; Ord. MC-1318, passed 10-20-2009; Ord.
MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.020 FILING FEE.
   The filing fee for nomination papers or for supplemental nomination papers
shall be $25. No nomination papers or supplemental nomination papers shall be
filed except upon proof of said payment. The filing fee(s) shall not be
refunded in the event the candidate fails to qualify as a candidate.
(Ord. 2048, passed 10-5-1954; Ord. 3601, passed 9-7-1976; Ord. MC-1318, passed
10-20-2009; Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.030 ELECTIONS OFFICIAL.
   The City Clerk shall serve as the city’s elections official and shall carry
out or cause to be carried out all the duties imposed on the elections official
by the California Elections Code, except as those duties may be carried out by
the county elections official for consolidated elections.
(Ord. 2048, passed 10-5-1954; Ord. 2779, passed 11-8-1966; Ord. 3792, passed
12-20-1978; Ord. MC-1318, passed 10-20-2009; Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.040 RESULTS OF PRIMARY ELECTION.
   (A)   In the event that any candidate receives a majority of the votes cast
for an office at the primary election, that candidate shall be elected to the
office, and shall be seated following certification of the general election
results.
   (B)   In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast for an
office in the primary election, the two candidates receiving the highest number
of votes for the office shall be the candidates for that office whose names
shall appear on the ballots to be used at the general municipal election.
   (C)   In the case of a tie vote among candidates at a primary election for a
voter-nominated office, all candidates receiving the highest number of votes
cast for any candidate shall be candidates at the ensuing general election,
whether or not there are more candidates at the general election than
prescribed by this chapter.
   (D)   If only one candidate receives the highest number of votes cast but
there is a tie vote among two or more candidates receiving the second highest
number of votes cast, each of those second-place candidates shall be a
candidate at the ensuing general election along with the candidate receiving
the highest number of votes cast, regardless of whether there are more
candidates at the general election than prescribed by this chapter.
(Ord. 2048, passed 10-5-1954; Ord. 3271, passed 6-28-1972; Ord. MC-852, passed
11-3-1992; Ord. MC-1318, passed 10-20-2009; Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.050 SEATING OF OFFICIALS ELECTED.
   The Mayor and City Council members elected in each election shall be sworn
in and begin their term of service upon certification of the general election
results, and shall serve until their successors qualify.
(Ord. 2048, passed 10-5-1954; Ord. 2429, passed 3-27-1962; Ord. MC-1318, passed
10-20-2009; Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.060 FILLING A VACANCY IN THE OFFICE OF THE MAYOR.
   In the event of a vacancy in the office of the Mayor, the City Council
shall, within 60 days from the commencement of the vacancy, either fill the
vacancy by appointment pursuant to the provisions applicable to general law
cities, including, but not limited to, the term of the appointment, or call a
special election in compliance with the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code, § 36512
and Cal. Elections Code, §§ 1002 and 12001.
(Ord. 2048, passed 10-5-1954; Ord. 2429, passed 3-27-1962; Ord. MC-1318, passed
10-20-2009; Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.070 FILLING A VACANCY OF A COUNCIL SEAT.
   In the event of a vacancy in a Council seat, the City Council shall, within
60 days from the commencement of the vacancy, either fill the vacancy by
appointment pursuant to the provisions applicable to general law cities,
including, but not limited to, the term of the appointment, or call a special
election in compliance with the provisions set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code, §
36512 and Cal. Elections Code, §§ 1002 and 12001.
(Ord. 2048, passed 10-5-1954; Ord. 3306, passed 10-24-1972; Ord. MC-852, passed
11-3-1992; Ord. MC-1318, passed 10-20-2009; Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.080 FISCAL ANALYSIS OF MEASURE.
   Whenever any city measure qualifies for a place on the ballot, the Mayor and
City Council may direct designated city officers to prepare an initial fiscal
analysis of the measure showing the amount of any increase or decrease in
revenue or cost to the city. The fiscal analysis shall be printed preceding the
arguments for and against the measure. If a City Attorney’s analysis has also
been directed pursuant to the Cal. Elections Code, § 9280, the City Attorney’s
analysis and the fiscal analysis shall be separately set forth.
(Ord. 2048, passed 10-5-1954; Ord. 2429, passed 3-27-1962; Ord. 3601, passed 9-
7-1976; Ord. MC-1318, passed 10-20-2009; Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.090 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018 and Ord. MC-1318, passed 10-20-
2009)
§ 2.56.100 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.105 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.110 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.120 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.130 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.140 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.142 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.143 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1318, passed 10-20-2009)
§ 2.56.144 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1318, passed 10-20-2009)
§ 2.56.146 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1318, passed 10-20-2009)
§ 2.56.148 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.150 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.160 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.170 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.171 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.173 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.175 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.180 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.190 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1453, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 2.56.195 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1318, passed 10-20-2009)
CHAPTER 2.57: ONLINE OR ELECTRONIC FILING OF FAIR POLITICAL PRACTICES
COMMISSION FORMS
Section
   
2.57.010   Fair Political Practices Commission Form 460
§ 2.57.010 FAIR POLITICAL PRACTICES COMMISSION FORM 460.
   Any person required to file a Fair Political Practices Commission Form 460
by Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 84100 et seq. shall file the Form 460 online or
electronically with the City Clerk. Any form filed electronically with the City
Clerk shall not be required to be filed in paper format.
(Ord. MC-1394, passed 12-16-2013)
CHAPTER 2.58: MEETINGS
Section
   
2.58.010   Meetings of the Mayor and City Council
   
2.58.020   Meetings of boards, commissions and committees
   
2.58.030   City Council conduct - generally
   
2.58.040   Mayor’s conduct - generally
   
2.58.050   Conduct at meetings and relating to city business
   
2.58.060   Prohibiting disruptive conduct at meetings
   
2.58.070   Willful disruptions of meetings of the Mayor and City Council
   
2.58.080   Holidays
   
2.58.090   Familiarity with Ralph M. Brown Act required
   
2.58.100   Continuances; fee
   
2.58.110   Public participation in meetings of the Mayor and City Council
   
2.58.120   Quasi-judicial hearings
§ 2.58.010 MEETINGS OF THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   (1)   Regular meetings of the Mayor and City Council shall be held on
the first and third Wednesdays of each month at the Bing Wong Lecture Hall,
Feldheym Central Library, 555 West 6th Street, San Bernardino, California, or
such other location within the city as may be properly noticed. The time of
regular meetings shall beset forth in a resolution adopted by a majority vote
of the membership of the Council.
      (2)   Special meetings of the Mayor and City Council may be called by the
Mayor, called by four members of the Council or scheduled by the City Manager
in accordance with the Brown Act and may be held at any location within the
city boundaries as specified in the special meeting notice to the public.
   (B)   The City Council, as the elected body serving all of the residents of
the city, shall perform its duties and exercise its powers in a manner that
serves the best interests of the entire city, rather than any particular
geographic area or special interest. All meetings of the Mayor and City Council
shall be held in accordance with the Brown Act.
(Ord. 2284, passed 2-24-1960; Ord. 3652, passed 7-15-1977; Ord. MC-98, passed
9-15-1981; Ord. MC-715, passed 4-2-1990; Ord. MC-883, passed 9-8-1993; Ord. MC-
1134, passed 12-4-2002; Ord. MC-1388, passed 6-3-2013; Ord. MC-1438, passed 4-
17-2017; Ord. MC-1511, passed 2-6-2019; Ord. MC-1626, passed 2-21-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Ralph M. Brown Act, see Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 54950 through 54963
§ 2.58.020 MEETINGS OF BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES.
   The dates, times and places of regular meetings of all boards, commissions
and committees of the city shall be set forth in one or more ordinances or
resolutions of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 3638, passed 4-20-1977; Ord. MC-184, passed 7-7-1982; Ord. MC-1438,
passed 4-17-2017)
§ 2.58.030 CITY COUNCIL CONDUCT - GENERALLY.
   As provided in the City Charter, §
302, the City Council and Mayor are required to implement a code of conduct to
guide their interactions and create accountability. In accordance with the City
Charter, §
302, the members of the City Council shall conform their conduct to the
following rules.
   (A)   The role of the City Council is legislative in character, which
includes the power to set policy, approve contracts and agreements not within
the authority of the City Manager, or his or her subordinates, and undertake
other obligations consistent with the Charter and code, while deferring to the
discretion of management and staff to choose the appropriate means to achieve
the Council’s goals.
   (B)   The City Council, as the elected body serving all of the residents of
the city, shall perform its duties and exercise its powers in a manner that
serves the best interests of the entire city, rather than any particular
geographic area or special interest.
(Ord. MC-390, passed 7-9-1984; Ord. MC-1438, passed 4-17-2017)
§ 2.58.040 MAYOR’S CONDUCT - GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Mayor will build consensus with the City Council to create and
implement a shared vision and plan of implementation to restore the city’s
fiscal integrity.
   (B)   The Mayor will establish and maintain partnerships and regional
leadership roles to advance the city’s interest.
   (C)   The Mayor will be the chief spokesperson for the city.
   (D)   The Mayor will be the presiding officer at meetings of the City
Council and willfully participate in discussions.
   (E)   The Mayor will work with the City Council and City Manager to
coordinate goal setting and the performance evaluation of the City Manager.
(Ord. MC-1438, passed 4-17-2017)
§ 2.58.050 CONDUCT AT MEETINGS AND RELATING TO CITY BUSINESS.
   (A)   The residents and businesses of the city are entitled to have fair,
ethical and accountable local government which has earned the public’s full
confidence for integrity. The city will operate in an open, honest and
transparent manner.
   (B)   To this end, the Mayor and City Council will adhere to the following
code of conduct to assure public confidence in the integrity of local
government, its effective operations and fair treatment of people.
      (1)   The professional and personal conduct of the Mayor and City Council
must be above reproach and avoid the appearance of impropriety. The Mayor and
members of the City Council shall refrain from abusive conduct, personal or
verbal attacks upon the character or motives of each other, the staff or the
public.
      (2)   The Mayor and members of the City Council shall perform their
duties in accordance with the procedural rules for meetings, established by
them, in governing the deliberation of public policy issues, involvement of the
public and the implementation of policy decisions of the Mayor and City Council
by city staff.
      (3)   The Mayor and City Council shall prepare themselves for public
issues, listen courteously and attentively to all public discussions before the
body; and focus on the business at hand. They shall refrain from interrupting
other speakers, making personal comments not germane to the business of the
body or otherwise interfering with the orderly conduct of meetings.
      (4)   The Mayor and City Council shall base their decisions on the merits
and substance of the matter at hand, rather than on unrelated considerations.
      (5)   The Mayor and City Council shall publicly share substantive
information that is relevant to the matter under their consideration, which
they may have received from sources outside of the public decision-making
process.
      (6)   In order to assure their independence and impartiality on behalf of
the common good, the Mayor and City Council shall not use their official
positions to influence government decisions in which they have a material
financial interest; or where they have an organizational responsibility or
personal relationship which may give the appearance of a conflict of interest.
      (7)   The Mayor and City Council shall not take any special advantage of
services or opportunities for personal gain, by virtue of their public office,
that is not available to the public in general. They shall refrain from
accepting any gifts, favors or promises of future benefits which might
compromise their independence of judgment or action, or give the appearance of
being compromised.
      (8)   The Mayor and City Council shall respect the confidentiality of
information concerning the property, personnel or affairs of the city. They
shall neither disclose confidential information without proper legal
authorization, nor use such information to advance their personal, financial or
other private interest.
      (9)   The Mayor and City Council shall not use public resources that are
not available to the public in general, such as city staff time, equipment,
supplies or facilities for private gain or personal purposes.
      (10)   The Mayor and City Council shall refrain from using their position
to unduly influence the deliberations or outcomes of commission proceedings.
      (11)   The Mayor and City Council will not divert management from the
approved priorities with issues of personal interest or requests for
information that may require significant staff resources without the active
approval of the majority of the Mayor and City Council. The Council will come
to consensus regarding major issues that need further exploration and analysis
so as to judiciously give direction to the City Manager and his or her staff.
This language does not prohibit the Mayor, Council members, City Attorney or
City Clerk from bringing information forward and discussing it with the City
Manager and/or staff.
      (12)   When the Mayor and City Council have not taken a position on an
issue, neither the Mayor nor any Council member should speak on behalf of the
Mayor and City Council. When presenting their individual opinions and
positions, Council members should explicitly state that they do not represent
their body, the city, nor should they encourage the inference that they do.
After a decision is made, the Mayor serves as the spokesperson for the city’s
view on policy matters; the City Council should speak with “one voice.”
      (13)   The Mayor and City Council shall support the maintenance of a
positive and constructive work place environment for city employees and for
residents and businesses dealing with the city. The Mayor and City Council
shall recognize their special role in dealings with city employees and in no
way create the perception of inappropriate direction to staff.
      (14)   With respect to communications with the City Manager and staff,
the following apply.
         (a)   Unless it is a simple inquiry, the Mayor or members of the City
Council will contact the City Manager before going to department heads.
         (b)   When contacting department directors through e-mail, the Mayor
and Council members will copy the City Manager as a courtesy.
         (c)   The City Manager will ensure that the Mayor and City Council are
proactively informed on major policy issues or issues that may attract media or
public attention; likewise, the Mayor and City Council members will give the
City Manager notice if he or she learns of issues of concern.
         (d)   The Mayor, City Council, City Manager and staff will not
blindside each other in public.
         (e)   Council members are encouraged to submit questions on agenda
items to the City Manager as far in advance of the meeting as possible so that
staff can be prepared to respond at the meeting.
         (f)   The Mayor and City Council will refer citizen complaints to
staff and give them adequate time to respond. Staff will report back to the
Council through the City Manager on the resolutions of these complaints.
         (g)   The Mayor and Council members will be provided with information
from staff and other members on an equal basis so that they are equally
prepared to make good decisions.
(Ord. MC-1438, passed 4-17-2017)
§ 2.58.060 PROHIBITING DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT AT MEETINGS.
   The Mayor or any member of the City Council shall not engage in disorderly
or disruptive conduct in the presence of the City Council at public meetings,
which conduct actually disrupts, disturbs or impedes the City Council meeting.
The City Council shall have power to punish the Mayor or any of its members for
disorderly or disruptive conduct in its presence after first providing notice
of the prohibited behavior and an opportunity to be heard. The fine shall not
exceed the sum of $50.
(Ord. MC-1438, passed 4-17-2017)
§ 2.58.070 WILLFUL DISRUPTIONS OF MEETINGS OF THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   The purpose of the meetings of the Mayor and City Council is to
conduct the people’s business in an efficient and orderly fashion for the
benefit of all the people. That purpose is disrupted by conduct, including oral
statements at meetings, that unduly prolongs the proceedings by being overly
repetitious or exceeding the allotted time, diverts attention from the matter
before the Mayor and City Council by raising or addressing irrelevant matters
or is directed at or to the audience, the Mayor, individual City Council
members or members of city staff individually rather than to the Mayor and City
Council as governing body of the city or the city as a whole.
   (B)   Accordingly, in the event that any meeting of the Mayor and City
Council is willfully disrupted by a person or group of persons so as to
actually impair the orderly conduct of the meeting, the members of the City
Council may proceed pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, § 54957.9, or any applicable
penal statute or ordinance. For the purposes of this section, WILLFULLY DISRUPT
includes, but is not limited to, continuing to do any of the following after
being warned by the presiding officer to desist from such conduct:
      (1)   Addressing the Mayor and City Council without first being
recognized by the presiding officer;
      (2)   Persisting in addressing a subject or subjects, other than that
before the Mayor and City Council;
      (3)   Repetitiously addressing the same subject;
      (4)   Failing to relinquish the podium when directed to do so by the
presiding officer;
      (5)   From the audience, interrupting, or attempting to interrupt, a
speaker, the Mayor, a City Council member or a staff member, or shouting or
attempting to shout over a speaker, the Mayor, a City Council member or a staff
member;
      (6)   As a speaker, interrupting or attempting to interrupt the Mayor, a
City Council member or a staff member, or shouting over, or attempting to shout
over, the Mayor, a City Council member or a staff member;
      (7)   As a speaker, continuing to speak after being advised that the
allotted time has expired;
      (8)   As a speaker, addressing the audience rather than the Mayor and
City Council;
      (9)   Making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks to a speaker,
the Mayor, a City Council member, a staff member or the general public, which
actually impairs the orderly conduct of the meeting; and
      (10)   Uttering loud, threatening, personal or abusive language, or
profanity, to a speaker, the Mayor, a City Council member, a staff member or
the general public which actually impairs the orderly conduct of the meeting.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this section. Nothing
in this section or any rules of the Council shall be construed to prohibit
public criticism of the policies, procedures, programs or services of the city
or any of the acts or omissions of the Mayor and City Council. Nothing in this
section shall confer any privilege or protection for expression beyond that
otherwise provided by law.
   (D)   If any division, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this section is
for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. The Mayor and
City Council declare that they would have enacted this section and each
division, sentence, clause, phrase and word thereof, irrespective of the fact
that any one or more divisions, sentences, clauses, phrases or words had been
declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. MC-1438, passed 4-17-2017; Ord. MC-1478, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 2.58.080 HOLIDAYS.
   In the event the date of a meeting falls on a city holiday, the next
business day following such holiday shall be the meeting date, at the same time
and place, except as determined by the City Council.
(Ord. MC-1438, passed 4-17-2017)
§ 2.58.090 FAMILIARITY WITH RALPH M. BROWN ACT REQUIRED.
   The clerk or secretary of each board, commission and committee shall review
and be familiar with the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act, Cal. Gov’t Code,
§§ 54950 et seq.
(Ord. MC-1438, passed 4-17-2017)
§ 2.58.100 CONTINUANCES; FEE.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity having an appeal or
other item on the agenda of the Mayor and City Council may request a
continuance of such item by submitting a request therefor to the City Clerk
prior to the item being heard. Such request must be accompanied by a processing
fee established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council. The granting of a
continuance shall be subject to the complete discretion of the Mayor and City
Council taking all of the facts and circumstances of the matter into
consideration. If the request for continuance is received by telephonic
communication or other means where the requester is not present, the
continuance may be granted subject to the receipt of the processing fee prior
to the new agenda date. Should the request for a continuance be denied, any
processing fee paid shall be returned upon application made by the payor within
90 days. Any subsequent request for a continuance shall require an additional
fee.
   (B)   The fee provided for by the ordinance incorporated in this chapter and
set by any resolution adopted pursuant thereto shall not apply to any
continuance requested by the city, any department or officer thereof or by any
agency or other entity which is funded primarily by the city.
(Ord. MC-1438, passed 4-17-2017)
§ 2.58.110 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN MEETINGS OF THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council may, by resolution, adopt reasonable
regulations, including time limits, for:
      (1)   Public comments for items on the agenda;
      (2)   Public comments for items not on the agenda; and
      (3)   Public testimony during public hearings.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the time limits on public comments and public
testimony adopted by resolution, the presiding officer may lengthen or shorten
the time limits afforded if the presiding officer determines such change is
necessary for the efficient conduct of the meeting or the proper consideration
of a complicated matter.
(Ord. MC-1478, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 2.58.120 QUASI-JUDICIAL HEARINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council may, by resolution, adopt rules of procedure for
the conduct of quasi-judicial hearings.
(Ord. MC-1478, passed 4-4-2018)
CHAPTER 2.60: DISCLOSURE OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1220, passed 3-20-2006)
CHAPTER 2.62: FILING OF OFFICIAL BONDS
Section
   
2.62.010   Amount
   
2.62.020   Blanket position bond
Cross-reference:
   For Charter provisions on official bonds, see City Charter, §
509
§ 2.62.010 AMOUNT.
   (A)   The following officers of the city, before entering upon the discharge
of their official duties, and within 20 days after notice of their election or
appointment, shall severally execute to the city an official faithful
performance bond in the following penal sums:
      (1)   Mayor, $1,000;
      (2)   Each member of the City Council, $1,000;
      (3)   City Clerk, $1,000;
      (4)   City Attorney, $1,000;
      (5)   Each member of the Board of Water Commissioners, $1,000; and
      (6)   City Treasurer, $100,000.
   (B)   The City Treasurer, in addition to his or her official bond in the
penal sum of $100,000, shall execute to the city an additional bond in the
penal sum of $25,000, which additional bond shall be known as the Treasurer’s
Trust Fund Bond and shall be conditioned for the payment by the Treasurer to
any person, firm or corporation lawfully entitled thereto, of all monies
received by the Treasurer, his or her deputies, clerks and attaches, under or
pursuant to the provisions of the Improvement Act of 1911, or any other special
assessment, law or act, by the provisions of which monies, other than monies
belonging to the city, are payable to the City Treasurer for disbursement to
any person, firm or corporation, other than the city, and which Trust Fund Bond
shall, by its provisions, be made to enure to the benefit of, and provide that
an action may be maintained thereon by, any person, firm or corporation
entitled to receive money from the Treasurer under the aforesaid laws.
(Ord. 2934, passed 8-20-1968)
Statutory reference:
   Ralph M. Brown Act, see Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 54950 through 54963
§ 2.62.020 BLANKET POSITION BOND.
   (A)   For each employee of the city, except employees in the City Municipal
Water Department, a blanket position bond shall be provided, indemnifying the
city against any and all fraudulent or dishonest acts and failure of
performance of official duties, including false arrest by Police Department
employees and failure to account properly for any and all monies or property
received by virtue or authority of any position or employment, of or by any
employee, acting alone or in collusion with others. The bond shall comply with
the provisions of all other ordinances of the city applicable thereto and shall
be in the following amounts for the employment indicated: Chief of Police,
$5,000; Chief Deputy City Treasurer, $90,000 and all other staff members of or
assigned to the Treasurer’s office, $20,000; City Manager, $10,000; Director of
Finance and Management Services, $10,000; purchasing agent, $10,000; and all
other employees, $2,500 each.
   (B)   The words EMPLOYEE or EMPLOYEES, as used in this section, means and
includes those officers, employees and other subordinates of the city who are
not otherwise required by ordinance or law to furnish an individual bond to
qualify for office or employment.
(Ord. 2934, passed 8-20-1968; Ord. 3383, passed 10-17-1973; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
CHAPTER 2.64: APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
2.64.010   Purpose
   
2.64.020   When procedure not applicable
   
2.64.030   Filing notice of appeal
   
2.64.040   Notice of appeal - time limit
   
2.64.050   Notice of appeal - contents
   
2.64.060   Action by the City Clerk
   
2.64.070   Consideration by Council
   
2.64.080   Judicial review
§ 2.64.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the appeal procedure prescribed in this chapter is to provide
a general method of recourse, in any instance where an appeal to the City
Council is not otherwise prescribed by code or other ordinance of the city,
available in the event any person is aggrieved by or dissatisfied with any
order, requirement, permit, decision or determination made by a city officer,
official or department head or by an administrative body of the city in the
administration or enforcement of any provision of any local ordinance, code,
rule or regulation.
(Ord. 2622, passed 11-17-1964)
§ 2.64.020 WHEN PROCEDURE NOT APPLICABLE.
   The appeal procedure prescribed in this chapter shall not apply when other
provisions of this code, an ordinance or resolution provides a method of appeal
to a board, commission, committee, a public body or employee in specific cases,
and shall not apply to law enforcement activities involving ordinances or state
law, or to the decisions of the Civil Service Board. These procedures shall
apply to any and all appeals to the City Council authorized in this chapter or
in other provisions of the code unless expressly otherwise provided.
(Ord. 2622, passed 11-17-1964; Ord. MC-410, passed 9-18-1984)
§ 2.64.030 FILING NOTICE OF APPEAL.
   Except as provided in §
2.64.020, any person aggrieved by, dissatisfied with or excepting to any
action, denial, order, requirement, permit, decision or determination made or
issued by a city officer, official or department head or by an administrative
board, commission, body or other agency of the city, pursuant to the provisions
of any ordinance, code, rule or regulation of the city, may appeal therefrom by
filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk, directed to the City
Council.
(Ord. 2622, passed 11-17-1964)
§ 2.64.040 NOTICE OF APPEAL - TIME LIMIT.
   Any such notice of appeal shall not be valid and shall not be acted upon
unless filed within 15 days after the date of the action or decision appealed
from. If notice of such action has not been provided in writing, and the
appellant had no notice of the hearing at which the action was to be
considered, the appellant may, within five days after first becoming aware of
such action, demand written notice thereof, and shall have ten days following
such notice in which to file the notice of appeal. A prospective appellant who
was present at the time the action or decision relating thereto was made shall
be presumed to have constructive notice thereof and shall file a notice of
appeal within 15 days after the date of the action or decision.
(Ord. 2622, passed 11-17-1964; Ord. MC-410, passed 9-18-1984)
§ 2.64.050 NOTICE OF APPEAL - CONTENTS.
   (A)   The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth:
      (1)   The specific action appealed from;
      (2)   The specific grounds of appeal; and
      (3)   The relief or action sought from the City Council.
   (B)   In the event any notice of appeal fails to set forth any information
required by this section, the City Clerk shall return the same to the appellant
with a statement of the respects in which it is deficient, and the appellant
shall thereafter be allowed five days in which to perfect and refile his or her
notice of appeal.
(Ord. 2622, passed 11-17-1964; Ord. MC-410, passed 9-18-1984)
§ 2.64.060 ACTION BY THE CITY CLERK.
   Upon the timely filing of a notice of appeal in proper form, the City Clerk
shall schedule the matter promptly for public hearing upon the City Council
agenda for the first regularly scheduled Council meeting following the sixth
day after said timely filing. City Clerk shall promptly give notice to the
appellant and affected city parties of the setting of such public hearing.
§ 2.64.070 CONSIDERATION BY COUNCIL.
   At the time of consideration of the appeal by the City Council, all evidence
and arguments shall be received, but shall be limited to, the specific grounds
of appeal and matters set forth in the notice of appeal. The appellant shall
have the burden of establishing cause why the action appealed from should be
altered, reversed or modified. The department, agency, city officer, official
or department head whose action is being considered shall have the opportunity
to answer arguments made and rebut any evidence so offered. The City Council
shall review the evidence, findings and record relating to the decision or
action. The City Council may continue the matter from time to time, and at the
conclusion of its consideration may affirm, reverse or modify the action
appealed from and may take any action which might have been legally taken in
the first instance by the person or entity from whose action the appeal has
been taken. In the ruling on the appeal, the findings and action of the City
Council shall be final and conclusive in the matter.
(Ord. 2622, passed 11-17-1964; Ord. MC-410, passed 9-18-1984)
§ 2.64.080 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   The Mayor and City Council shall take all lawful steps to ensure that any
appellant aggrieved by said decision of the City Council shall be afforded
prompt judicial review if such decision is challenged in court.
(Ord. MC-1075, passed 6-21-2000)
CHAPTER 2.65: SALE OF REAL PROPERTY
Section
   
2.65.010   Authority
   
2.65.020   Competitive bid
   
2.65.030   Negotiated purchase
   
2.65.040   Fair market value
   
2.65.050   Sales to public agencies
   
2.65.060   Terms
§ 2.65.010 AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the City Charter, real property owned by the
city shall be sold as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. MC-955, passed 12-19-1995)
§ 2.65.020 COMPETITIVE BID.
   Real property with a fair market value of $25,000 or greater shall be sold
by competitive bid to the highest and best bidder, but the sales price shall
not be less than the fair market value.
(Ord. MC-955, passed 12-19-1995)
§ 2.65.030 NEGOTIATED PURCHASE.
   Real property with a fair market value of less than $25,000 may be sold by
negotiated purchase, but the sales price shall not be less than the fair market
value.
(Ord. MC-955, passed 12-19-1995)
§ 2.65.040 FAIR MARKET VALUE.
   For the purposes of this chapter, fair market value shall be established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council based on good and sufficient evidence
in the record. For the purposes of property with a fair market value of $25,000
or more, GOOD AND SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE shall mean and include a formal appraisal
performed by a licensed appraiser who is not a city employee.
(Ord. MC-955, passed 12-19-1995)
§ 2.65.050 SALES TO PUBLIC AGENCIES.
   Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, real property
owned by the city may be sold to another public agency without the need for
competitive bid, but the sales price shall not be less than the fair market
value.
(Ord. MC-955, passed 12-19-1995)
§ 2.65.060 TERMS.
   A sales price may be a cash purchase or the city may accept a note and deed
of trust at the fair market interest rate.
(Ord. MC-955, passed 12-19-1995)
CHAPTER 2.66: CONTRACT OF INDEMNITY
Section
   
2.66.010   Corporation requirements
§ 2.66.010 CORPORATION REQUIREMENTS.
   In all instances where, by the provisions of the Charter, or any ordinance
or resolution of the city, or by any law, any bond, undertaking, contract of
indemnity or insurance is required or provided for or on behalf of the city or
any board, department or officer thereof, the same shall be executed by a
corporation organized under the laws of the United States or under the laws of
any state thereof, and authorized to transact business in the state in
accordance with law, and such corporation shall have a general policyholder’s
rating in accordance with A.M. Best Company of no less than A:VIII and licensed
to do business in the state; provided, however, the provisions of this section
shall not apply in those instances where by law the city is required to obtain
insurance or indemnity from the State Compensation Fund or some like
governmental entity.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 1918, passed 7-2-1951)
CHAPTER 2.68: VACANCIES IN OFFICE
Section
   
2.68.010   Assumption of duties by highest ranking department member
   
2.68.020   Temporary absence - assumption of duties
   
2.68.030   Chapter inapplicable to Mayor and members of City Council
§ 2.68.010 ASSUMPTION OF DUTIES BY HIGHEST RANKING DEPARTMENT MEMBER.
   In the event of a vacancy in the office of the head of a department or
division or other office of the city, the assistant, chief deputy or highest
ranking officer in such department, division or office shall assume the duties
and powers of the department or division head or officer as an assignment of
such powers and duties by the Mayor and City Council, except as may be
otherwise provided to the contrary by the Charter, or by an ordinance,
resolution or order of the Mayor and City Council. The performance of such
duties and powers by the assistant, chief deputy or highest ranking officer of
such department, division or office shall not entitle such officer to any
additional salary, compensation or benefits as the head of the department,
division or office, except as may be authorized pursuant to a resolution or
ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 3770, passed 10-6-1978)
§ 2.68.020 TEMPORARY ABSENCE - ASSUMPTION OF DUTIES.
   In the temporary absence of the head of a department, division or office,
the assistant, chief deputy or highest ranking officer of such department,
division or office shall assume the duties and powers of the head of the
department, division or office, except as may be otherwise ordered by the head
of such department, division or office. The performance of the duties and
powers of the head of the department, division or office by the assistant,
chief deputy or highest ranking officer shall be considered an assignment of
additional duties and powers, and shall not entitle such assistant, chief
deputy or highest ranking officer to any additional salary, compensation or
benefits while performing the duties and powers of the head of the department,
division or office, except as may be authorized pursuant to resolution or
ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 3770, passed 10-6-1978)
§ 2.68.030 CHAPTER INAPPLICABLE TO MAYOR AND MEMBERS OF CITY COUNCIL.
   This chapter shall be inapplicable to the offices of the Mayor and members
of the City Council.
(Ord. 3770, passed 10-6-1978)
CHAPTER 2.70: SALE OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Section
   
2.70.010   Definition
   
2.70.020   State statute adopted by reference
   
2.70.030   Sale at public auction
   
2.70.040   Proceeds of sale
   
2.70.050   Duty of Police Department
   
2.70.060   Sale of forfeited property
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on lost and unclaimed property, see Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure, §§ 1500 et seq.
§ 2.70.010 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   UNCLAIMED PROPERTY. Includes any and all lost, abandoned or unclaimed
personal property of whatsoever kind or character, but does not include such
property which is specifically ordered to be destroyed by the provisions of the
law nor to the disposal of dogs, cats or livestock.
(Ord. 2121, passed 6-19-1956)
§ 2.70.020 STATE STATUTE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Cal. Civil Code, §§ 2080, 2080.1 and 2080.2 are adopted by reference
and made effective and operative in the city. Any and all unclaimed property
now or hereinafter coming into the possession of the Police Department shall be
inventoried at least every three months by the Chief of Police and a full and
complete list thereof shall be transmitted to the City Manager.
   (B)   Any and all unclaimed property found by city employees during the
course of their employment shall be delivered to the Police Department and
shall be disposed of in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2121, passed 6-19-1956; Ord. 3273, passed 7-14-1972)
§ 2.70.030 SALE AT PUBLIC AUCTION.
   (A)   The City Manager, upon receipt of the list of unclaimed property,
shall determine therefrom the unclaimed bicycles that have been held by the
Police Department for a period of at least three months and all other unclaimed
property that has been held at least four months, whereupon the City Manager
shall cause the unclaimed property so held to be sold at public auction.
   (B)   Notice of such sale, describing the property in sufficient detail for
its identification, shall be prepared by the City Manager, or his or her
designee, and the notice signed by the Chief of Police, which notice of the
sale shall be given at least five days before the time fixed therefor by
publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city.
   (C)   If, after five days following the publication of the notice, no owner
appears and proves his or her ownership of the property and the person who
found or saved the property pays the cost of the publication, the title shall
vest in the person who found or saved the property unless the property was
found in the course of employment by an employee of the city in which case the
property shall be sold at public auction or transferred for the use of any
department of the city. Title to the property shall not vest in the person who
found or saved the property unless the cost of publication is first paid to the
City Treasurer prior to the sale at public auction.
   (D)   No city officer or employee shall directly or indirectly submit a bid
for the purchase of the unclaimed property at the sale if he or she has
authorized, conducted or administered, or participated in the preparation or
conduct of the sale in his or her official capacity.
   (E)   The property so offered for sale shall be sold to the highest bidder
for cash or other form of payment that may be approved by the City Manager.
(Ord. 2121, passed 6-19-1956; Ord. 3273, passed 7-14-1972)
§ 2.70.040 PROCEEDS OF SALE.
   The proceeds of the auction sale or sales shall immediately be deposited
with the City Treasurer and placed in the General Fund thereof.
(Ord. 2121, passed 6-19-1956)
§ 2.70.050 DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Police Department to safely
keep any and all unclaimed properties, subject to the right of the
administrative officer to sell such properties at public auction as provided in
this chapter, whereupon the property shall then be delivered to the purchaser
upon payment of the purchase price.
(Ord. 2121, passed 6-19-1956)
§ 2.70.060 SALE OF FORFEITED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Property forfeited pursuant to 21 U.S.C. §§ 881 et seq. and Cal.
Health and Safety Code, §§ 11488 et seq. that is released to the Police
Department for disposition may be sold at public auction following the
procedures set forth in §
2.70.030(B), (D) and (E).
   (B)   Proceeds from the sale of such forfeited property shall be deposited
in the Special Deposits Fund of the city in a special account designated by the
Director of Finance and Management Services and thereafter be disbursed by the
Department with the authorization of the City Manager pursuant to the
applicable city procedures and state and/or federal laws.
(Ord. MC-624, passed 5-4-1988; Ord. MC-1220, passed 3-20-2006; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
CHAPTER 2.72: DEMANDS AGAINST CITY; PAYMENT
Section
   
2.72.010   Demands; payment; signature
§ 2.72.010 DEMANDS; PAYMENT; SIGNATURE.
   Drafts (warrants) or checks for payment of approved demands against the city
shall be signed by the City Treasurer or such other city official as may be
designated by resolution of the Mayor and City Council and countersigned by the
City Clerk. Pursuant to the City Charter, § 135, this provision shall prevail
over any conflicting provisions of the general law.
(Ord. MC-47, passed 4-27-1981)
CHAPTER 2.73: COLLECTION OF DEBTS
Section
   
2.73.010   Definition
   
2.73.020   Manner of collection - general
   
2.73.030   Manner of collection - collection agency
§ 2.73.010 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEBT OWING TO THE CITY (sometimes referred to as ACCOUNT or ACCOUNTS). The
amount of any unpaid judgment, fee, charge, fine, penalty, tax, assessment or
other sum of any nature whatsoever, imposed on a person other than the city
pursuant to any provision of this municipal code. The term includes all amounts
encompassed in the foregoing notwithstanding the separate or additional
classification of such amount that may be set forth in the applicable provision
of the municipal code. The term includes all interest; accruals; administrative
fees; fees, including attorneys’ fees; penalties; and/or costs of collection
associated with the original amount.
§ 2.73.020 MANNER OF COLLECTION - GENERAL.
   (A)   Any debt owing to the city is subject to recovery using any procedure
for debt collection permitted by law.
   (B)   The procedures set forth in this chapter are in addition to and not in
derogation of any other provision for collection of a debt owing to the city.
(Ord. MC-1330, passed 8-3-2010)
§ 2.73.030 MANNER OF COLLECTION - COLLECTION AGENCY.
   (A)   The City Manager may, with the approval of the Mayor and City Council,
contract for the services of a collection agency to recover amounts due as a
debt owing to the city. If the election is made to use a collection agency,
such use shall be consistent with the provisions set forth herein. The City
Manager may delegate this authority among the departments of the city as he or
she may deem appropriate.
   (B)   Employment of a collection agency shall not include the services of a
licensed attorney and shall not include participation in any court proceeding
by the collection agency on behalf of the city except with the prior written
approval of the City Attorney.
   (C)   Prior to transfer of the account to a collection agency, the City
Manager, or his or her designee, shall notify the debtor in writing, at the
address of record, that the alleged debt owing to the city will be turned over
for private collection unless the account is paid or appealed within a
designated time period.
   (D)   Assignment or other legal transfer of the rights in an account to the
collection agency may be made with the prior approval of the City Attorney.
   (E)   No debt owing to the city shall be transferred to a collection agency
if the account has been contested.
   (F)   No contract with a collection agency for the collection of debt owing
to the city shall take effect unless and until there are written policies and
procedures for the internal processing of such amounts.
(Ord. MC-1330, passed 8-3-2010)
CHAPTER 2.74: FINANCIAL INTERESTS OF APPOINTED CITY COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Section
   
2.74.010   Participation of committee members - financial interest
   
2.74.020   Participation in local governmental action or decision
   
2.74.030   Financial interest - material effect - indirect investment or
interest
   
2.74.040   Definition: decision making authority
§ 2.74.010 PARTICIPATION OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS - FINANCIAL INTEREST.
   No member appointed by the Mayor, the Council or a Council member and
approved by the Council to a committee having decision making authority shall
make, participate in making or in any way attempt to use the member’s official
position to influence a governmental decision in which the member knows, or has
reason to know, the member has a financial interest.
(Ord. MC-64, passed 6-19-1981)
§ 2.74.020 PARTICIPATION IN LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL ACTION OR DECISION.
   Section
2.74.010 does not prevent any committee member from making or participating in
the making of a governmental decision to the extent the member’s participation
is legally required for the action or decision to be made. The fact that a
committee member’s vote is needed to break a tie does not make the member’s
participation legally required for purposes of this section.
(Ord. MC-64, passed 6-19-1981)
§ 2.74.030 FINANCIAL INTEREST - MATERIAL EFFECT - INDIRECT INVESTMENT OR
INTEREST.
   (A)   A committee member has a financial interest in a decision within the
meaning of §
2.74.010 if it is reasonably foreseeable that the decision will have a material
financial effect, distinguishable from its effect on the public generally, on:
      (1)   Any business entity in which the committee member has a direct or
indirect interest worth more than $1,000;
      (2)   Any real property in which the committee member has a direct or
indirect interest worth more than $1,000;
      (3)   Any source of income, other than loans by a commercial lending
institution in the regular course of business on terms available to the public
without regard to official status, aggregating $250 or more in value provided
to, received by or promised to the committee member within 12 months prior to
the time when the decision is made; and
      (4)   Any business in which the committee member is a director, officer,
partner, trustee, employee or holds a position of management.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, INDIRECT INVESTMENT or INTEREST means
any investment or interest owned by the spouse or dependent child of a
committee member, by an agent or on behalf of a committee member or by a
business entity or trust in which the committee member, the committee member’s
agents, spouse and dependent children own directly, indirectly or beneficially
a 10% interest or greater.
(Ord. MC-64, passed 6-19-1981)
§ 2.74.040 DEFINITION: DECISION MAKING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   It may make a final governmental decision.
   (B)   It may compel a governmental decision, or it may prevent a
governmental decision either by reason of an exclusive power to initiate the
decision or by reason of a veto which may not be overridden.
   (C)   It makes substantive recommendations which are, and over an extended
period of time have been, regularly approved without significant amendment or
modification by another public official or governmental agency.
(Ord. MC-64, passed 6-19-1981)
CHAPTER 2.75: USE OF CITY’S CATV FACILITIES
Section
   
2.75.010   Prohibition
   
2.75.020   Exceptions
§ 2.75.010 PROHIBITION.
   It shall be an unlawful use of city property and facilities for the Mayor or
a member of the City Council of the city to use his or her position to use or
cause to be used the equipment and/or facilities of the Telecommunications
Division for television or CATV telecast or tape production for the purpose of
criticizing the actions of the Mayor or City Council or the Mayor and City
Council or any individual member of the City Council.
(Ord. MC-822, passed 3-9-1992)
§ 2.75.020 EXCEPTIONS.
   Section
2.75.010 shall not apply to a legally called meeting of the Mayor and City
Council, nor to a political debate or public forum where candidates or
proponents and opponents of ballot measures are given equal opportunity to
present their views. This exception shall not allow such criticism to be
televised or taped during a recess or closed session of a Council meeting even
though the Council is still technically in session during said recess or closed
session.
(Ord. MC-822, passed 3-9-1992)
CHAPTER 2.76: COUNCIL COMMITTEES
Section
   
2.76.010   Powers of City Council sub-committees
   
2.76.020   Notice of meetings
   
2.76.030   Information from city personnel
   
2.76.040   Assignment of sub-committee members and designation of sub-committee
chairpersons
§ 2.76.010 POWERS OF CITY COUNCIL SUB-COMMITTEES.
   Any committee appointed by the Mayor from among the City Council membership
shall have power to study, research and make appropriate recommendations to the
Mayor and City Council concerning any matter referred to such committee by the
Mayor and City Council. The scope and function of any such Council sub-
committee shall be as directed by the Mayor and City Council, which shall
provide specific direction as to the purposes and actions of the Council sub-
committee.
(Ord. MC-345, passed 3-7-1984; Ord. MC-362, passed 4-17-1984; Ord. MC-1455,
passed 2-7-2018)
§ 2.76.020 NOTICE OF MEETINGS.
   Each City Council sub-committee shall give reasonable notice of time and
place of its meetings and shall provide a copy of its agenda, attachments and
minutes to the Mayor, City Council, City Manager, City Attorney and such other
city officials as it may deem advisable.
(Ord. MC-345, passed 3-7-1984; Ord. MC-362, passed 4-17-1984; Ord. MC-1455,
passed 2-7-2018)
§ 2.76.030 INFORMATION FROM CITY PERSONNEL.
   Upon the referral of any matter by the Mayor and City Council, such City
Council sub-committee, whether standing, permanent or temporary, shall have
power to request, upon giving reasonable notice, the City Manager to provide,
or cause to be provided, to the sub-committee such data reasonably required by
the City Council sub-committee to carry out its direction.
(Ord. MC-345, passed 3-7-1984; Ord. MC-362, passed 4-17-1984; Ord. MC-1455,
passed 2-7-2018)
§ 2.76.040 ASSIGNMENT OF SUB-COMMITTEE MEMBERS AND DESIGNATION OF SUB-COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSONS.
   It shall be the responsibility and duty of the Mayor to assign City Council
members to all standing committees and ad hoc sub-committees of the City
Council. It shall also be the responsibility and duty of the Mayor to designate
chairpersons of all standing sub committees and ad hoc sub-committees of the
City Council.
(Ord. MC-1289, passed 11-4-2008; Ord. MC-1455, passed 2-7-2018)
CHAPTER 2.77: FACILITIES MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1324, passed 6-8-2010)
CHAPTER 2.78: CODE COMPLIANCE DEPARTMENT
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1355, passed 7-6-2011)
CHAPTER 2.79: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT
Section
   
2.79.010   Established
   
2.79.020   Director - duties
§ 2.79.010 ESTABLISHED.
   The information technology department is established which shall be
administered by a Director of Information Technology. The position of Director
of Information Technology shall be filled by appointment of the City Manager
with the approval of the City Council.
§ 2.79.020 DIRECTOR - DUTIES.
   The Director of Information Technology, under the immediate supervision and
direction of the City Manager, shall have all the powers and perform all the
duties that are now or may hereafter be conferred or imposed by City Charter,
law or the Mayor and City Council relating to development and maintenance of
the city’s computer systems, and other such duties as may be assigned by the
City Manager. The Director shall plan, coordinate and report on all the duties
and activities involved in such programs.
(Ord. MC-1220, passed 3-20-2006)
CHAPTER 2.80: ANIMAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1324, passed 6-8-2010)
CHAPTER 2.81: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
2.81.010   Appointment of Police Chief
   
2.81.020   Duties of Police Chief
§ 2.81.010 APPOINTMENT OF POLICE CHIEF.
   The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the confirmation of the City Council, a
police chief. The position requires exceptional qualifications of a managerial,
professional and educational character.
§ 2.81.020 DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
   The Police Chief shall have the general management and supervision over the
Police Department, under the regulations and directions of the Mayor and City
Council and under the immediate supervision of the City Manager.
(Ord. MC-1220, passed 3-20-2006)
CHAPTER 2.82: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL COMPENSATION
Section
   
2.82.010   Compensation of Mayor
   
2.82.020   Compensation of City Council members
§ 2.82.010 COMPENSATION OF MAYOR.
   (A)   Commencing with the certification of the November 2022 election, the
Mayor shall receive the following compensation:
      (1)   Annual salary of $50,000;
      (2)   Employer health benefits contribution equivalent to that offered by
the city to management employees; and
      (3)   An auto allowance of $725 per month.
   (B)   The compensation set forth herein shall be paid without regard to the
number of City Council meetings attended by the Mayor. The Mayor may waive all
or any portion of her or his own compensation. The compensation set forth
herein is exclusive of any amounts payable to the Mayor as per day compensation
for city business-related travel and further exclusive of any amounts payable
to the Mayor for out of town attendance on city-related business.
(Ord. MC-1504, passed 10-3-2018; Ord. MC-1571, passed 2-2-2022)
§ 2.82.020 COMPENSATION OF CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   Each City Council member shall receive the following compensation:
      (1)   Annual salary of $37,500;
      (2)   Employer health benefits contribution equivalent to that offered by
the city to management employees;
      (3)   An auto allowance of $725 per month; and
      (4)   An annual cost of living adjustment equivalent to that offered by
the city to management employees.
   (B)   The compensation set forth herein shall be paid without regard to the
number of City Council meetings attended by the applicable City Council member.
Any City Council member may waive all or any portion of her or his own
compensation. The compensation set forth herein is exclusive of any amounts
payable to a City Council member as per day compensation for city business-
related travel and further exclusive of any amounts payable to a City Council
member for out of town attendance on city-related business.
(Ord. MC-1504, passed 10-3-2018; Ord. MC-1595, passed 11-2-2022)
CHAPTER 2.83: DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
2.83.010   Established
   
2.83.020   Director - duties
§ 2.83.010 ESTABLISHED.
   There is established a department of economic development.
(Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 2.83.020 DIRECTOR - DUTIES.
   The Department shall be under the management and control of the Director of
Economic Development, who shall be appointed by the City Manager with approval
of the Mayor and City Council. Under the policies of the Mayor and City
Council, the Director shall have all the powers and perform all the duties that
are now or may hereafter be conferred or imposed by City Charter, law or the
Mayor and City Council relating to economic development, planning, designing
and implementing economic development strategies, as well as acting as a key
liaison between public and private sectors and the community, and shall plan,
coordinate and report on all the duties and activities involved in such
programs.
(Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
TITLE 3: REVENUE AND FINANCE
   Chapter
      
3.04.   PURCHASING SYSTEM
      
3.05.   BUDGET TRANSFERS
      
3.08.   WARRANTS
      
3.10.   CHECKS RETURNED FOR INSUFFICIENT FUNDS
      
3.12.   REFUND OF FEES FOR PERMITS, LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES
      
3.13.   WAIVER OR REFUND OF FEES FOR CHARITABLE    ORGANIZATIONS
      
3.16.   CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
      
3.20.   SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
      
3.24.   TRAFFIC SAFETY FUND
      
3.26.   TRAFFIC SYSTEMS FEE
      
3.27.   DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
      
3.28.   SPECIAL PUBLIC HEALTH FUND
      
3.32.   PUBLIC PARK DEVELOPMENT AND RECREATION FUND
      
3.36.   CEMETERY FUND
      
3.38.   PLANNED LOCAL DRAINAGE FACILITIES FUND
      
3.40.   PROPERTY TAXES
      
3.44.   SERVICE USERS TAX
      
3.46.   SERVICE USERS TAX REDUCTION AND MODERNIZATION ACT
      
3.48.   REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
      
3.52.   UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
      
3.54.   RESERVED
      
3.55.   TRANSIENT LODGING TAX
      
3.56.   UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
      
3.57.   TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
      
3.60.   CIGARETTE TAX
      
3.64.   TAX ON PARKING AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA
      
3.68.   ASSESSMENT FOR NUISANCE ABATEMENT
      
3.70.   FEES SET BY RESOLUTION
      
3.72.   USER FEES FOR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
      
3.73.   USER FEES FOR VIDEO PRODUCTION SERVICES
      
3.75.   DRAINAGE FACILITIES; PUBLIC UTILITIES
      
3.80.   COST RECOVERY SYSTEM FOR BOOKING FEE COLLECTIONS
CHAPTER 3.04: PURCHASING SYSTEM
Section
   
3.04.010   Adoption of purchasing system
   
3.04.020   Purchasing division
   
3.04.030   Bidding requirements
   
3.04.040   Approval authority
   
3.04.050   Purchase orders and procurement cards
   
3.04.060   Encumbrance of funds
   
3.04.070   Emergency purchases
   
3.04.080   Surplus supplies and equipment
   
3.04.090   Split purchases
   
3.04.100   Local bidders
   
3.04.110   Reserved
   
3.04.120   Reserved
   
3.04.130   Reserved
   
3.04.140   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   For provisions requiring local agencies to adopt policies and procedures
governing purchases of supplies and equipment, see Cal. Gov’t Code, § 54202
§ 3.04.010 ADOPTION OF PURCHASING SYSTEM.
   (A)   Establishment. In order to establish efficient procedures for the
purchase of supplies, materials and equipment, and contracted services; to
secure for all departments or agencies of the city supplies, materials,
equipment and services at the lowest possible cost commensurate with the
quality needed; to exercise positive financial control over purchases; to
clearly define authority for the purchasing functions; and to assure that
quality of purchases, a centralized purchasing system is adopted. Except as
specified herein, there shall be no exemption from centralized purchasing and
no agency or department shall be authorized to purchase or contract for the
purchase of supplies, services or equipment independently of the Purchasing
Division. The City Municipal Water Department and the San Bernardino Public
Library shall not be subject to this centralized purchasing system; however,
the Board of Water Commissioners and the Board of the San Bernardino Public
Library shall employ procedures substantially in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter as such may be applicable.
   (B)   Purchasing policy. All purchases of goods, supplies, equipment and
services shall be made in accordance with the formal purchasing policy in
effect at the time of the purchase. The purchasing policy shall be developed by
staff and adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The purchasing policy may be
changed, from time to time, by City Council resolution in order to remain in
compliance with necessary law and to address the evolving procurement needs of
the city.
   (C)   Vendor lists. The city may utilize the processes of this chapter and
purchasing policy to procure vendors who will be eligible or preferred to
provide goods or services to the city on an as-needed basis.
   (D)   Exemptions. This chapter shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Purchases from, or sales to, a government or governmental agency,
or through any advantageous governmental contract approved by the Council, or
to the purchase of election supplies, or to purchases and/or services or
service contracts relating to litigation or prosecution or investigations
thereof, or to purchases and/or services or service contracts relating to fire
and police investigations, or to the purchases and/or services or service
contracts relating to board up or demolition of buildings or structures;
      (2)   Purchases from a vendor or manufacturer which, through the city’s
bidding procedure, or other government or governmental agency’s bidding
procedure, has established a price at which such a vendor or manufacturer is
willing to sell to the city. During such a bid procedure, more than one
responsive bid must have been received;
      (3)   Purchases approved by the Mayor and City Council;
      (4)   Purchases of less than $10,000;
      (5)   Procurement procedures for public works projects are defined in
Chapters 12.20,
12.21 and
12.24;
      (6)   Sole source procurements, as more defined in the purchasing policy;
      (7)   Emergency procurements, as more defined in §
3.04.070 and the purchasing policy;
      (8)   Federal/grant-funded procurement to the extent that this chapter
and purchasing policy is inconsistent any federal, grant or other funding
source requirement for a particular purchase. In that event, the federal, grant
or other funding source procurement requirements shall control; and
      (9)   Inadequate competition, as more defined in the purchasing policy.
(Ord. 2588, passed 6-23-1964; Ord. MC-431, passed 1-25-1985; Ord. MC-513,
passed 4-22-1986; Ord. MC-608, passed 9-22-1987; Ord. MC-858, passed 1-12-1993;
Ord. MC-983, passed 9-24-1996; Ord. MC-1605, passed 2-1-2023)
§ 3.04.020 PURCHASING DIVISION.
   Unless otherwise exempted under this chapter, the purchase and sale of all
supplies, materials, equipment and services shall be the responsibility of the
Purchasing Division. The Purchasing Division is part of the Department of
Finance and Management Services, which is responsible for carrying out written
administrative procedures adopted by the City Council related to procurement.
The Purchasing Division Manager is responsible for the purchasing policy, and
will develop, advise, review, audit and ensure compliance throughout the
purchasing process as the city’s subject matter expert.
(Ord. 2588, passed 6-23-1964; Ord. MC-858, passed 1-12-1993; Ord. MC-1605,
passed 2-1-2023; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.04.030 BIDDING REQUIREMENTS.
   The procurement process used to purchase supplies, material, equipment and
contracted services is dependent upon the total dollar amount of the goods or
services to be purchased and the type of purchase.
   (A)   Purchases up to $10,000. Purchases up to $10,000 may be purchased
using a purchasing card or through a check request with no requirement for
formal bids or quotes.
   (B)   Purchases between $10,001 and $40,000. Purchases between $10,001 and
$40,000 are processed informally through vendor quotations and may be processed
directly by the department making the purchase. The informal bidding process is
more particularly described in the purchasing policy.
   (C)   Purchases above $40,000.
      (1)   Purchases in this category are subject to formal competitive
bidding or competitive selection depending on the type of purchase. The formal
competitive bidding process is more particularly described in the purchasing
policy.
      (2)   All contracts in this category signed by the City Manager, agency
directors, directors and/or their designees shall be reported (in list form) to
the Mayor and City Council at each regular City Council meeting during the City
Manager update.
(Ord. 2588, passed 6-23-1964; Ord. MC-1605, passed 2-1-2023)
§ 3.04.040 APPROVAL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The authority to purchase supplies, material, equipment and contracted
services is dependent upon the total dollar amount of the goods or services to
be purchased and the type of purchase.
   (B)   Purchasing authority are based on the following amounts.
      (1)   Purchases up to $50,000. Purchases in this category may be
authorized by the agency/department directors and/or the City Manager.
      (2)   Purchases between $50,001 and $100,000. Purchases in this category
may only be authorized by the City Manager or the Assistant City Manager with
prior written authorization from the City Manager in the City Manager’s
absence.
      (3)   Purchases over $100,000. Purchases in this category may only be
authorized by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 2588, passed 6-23-1964; Ord. MC-1605, passed 2-1-2023)
§ 3.04.050 PURCHASE ORDERS AND PROCUREMENT CARDS.
   Purchase of supplies, materials and equipment shall be made only by purchase
order or procurement card, whichever is appropriate.
(Ord. 2588, passed 6-23-1964; Ord. MC-858, passed 1-12-1993; Ord. MC-1605,
passed 2-1-2023)
§ 3.04.060 ENCUMBRANCE OF FUNDS.
   The Purchasing Division shall not issue any purchase order for supplies,
materials or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the
account against which the purchase is to be charged, and until the same has
been approved by the Budget Division of the Department of Finance and
Management Services.
(Ord. 2588, passed 6-23-1964; Ord. MC-1605, passed 2-1-2023; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.04.070 EMERGENCY PURCHASES.
   In case of an emergency, which is so urgent as to preclude advance action by
the Mayor and City Council and which requires purchase of supplies, materials,
equipment or contractual services, the City Manager shall have the authority to
authorize securing in the open market any such supplies, materials, equipment
or contractual services. This emergency authority shall extend to all
purchases, irrespective of the fact that the amount might exceed the authorized
thresholds outlined in §
3.05.020. An explanation of the emergency circumstances shall be filed with the
Mayor and City Council within 48 hours of the emergency purchase.
(Ord. 2588, passed 6-23-1964; Ord. 3514, passed 8-6-1975; Ord. 3723, passed 5-
4-1978; Ord. 3893, passed 1-9-1980; Ord. MC-183, passed 7-7-1982; Ord. MC-491,
passed 1-22-1986; Ord. MC-602, passed 6-2-11987; Ord. MC-646, passed 12-7-1988;
Ord. MC-858, passed 1-12-1993; Ord. MC-1413, passed 4-6-2015; Ord. MC-1569,
passed 2-2-2022; Ord. MC-1605, passed 2-1-2023)
§ 3.04.080 SURPLUS SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   All agencies and departments shall submit to the Purchasing Division
reports showing all supplies, materials and equipment which are no longer used
or usable or which may have become obsolete, unsuitable or worn out. The
Purchasing Division Manager shall have authority to sell said supplies,
materials and equipment, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on,
new supplies, materials and equipment. Such sales, exchanges or trade-ins shall
be made to the highest and best bidder, pursuant to the procedures in the
purchasing policy, or shall be made at a public auction as hereinafter set
forth in §
3.04.100.
   (B)   A notice describing the property in sufficient detail for its
identification shall be prepared by the Purchasing Division and shall be given
at least five days before the time fixed therefore by publication once in an
established newspaper or other publication of general circulation published in
the city.
   (C)   City officers shall not be purchasers at any such public auction
authorized, conducted or administered by them in their official capacity, nor
shall any city officer or employee, directly or indirectly, submit a bid at the
auction if they have participated in the preparation or conduct of the auction
in their official capacity.
   (D)   The property so offered for sale shall be sold to the highest bidder
for cash; provided that the Purchasing Manager may, at his or her discretion,
fix a minimum sale price and may refuse to sell unless the minimum price is
offered, and may further refuse to sell unless a deposit of security is
immediately made.
   (E)   Any property sold at public auction shall be provided to the purchaser
upon full payment of the purchase price.
   (F)   The proceeds of the auction sale or sales shall immediately be
deposited with the Department of Finance and Management Services and deposited
into the General Fund of the city.
(Ord. 2588, passed 6-23-1964; Ord. 3531, passed 10-7-1975; Ord. 3893, passed 1-
9-1980; Ord. MC-183, passed 7-7-1982; Ord. MC-602, passed 6-2-11987; Ord. MC-
646, passed 12-7-1988; Ord. MC-858, passed 1-12-1993; Ord. MC-1413, passed 4-6-
2015; Ord. MC-1605, passed 2-1-2023; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.04.090 SPLIT PURCHASES.
   It shall be unlawful to split, or separate into smaller purchases, a
purchase in order to bring the purchase within the provisions of any exemption
or less stringent procedure provided herein.
(Ord. 2588, passed 6-23-1964; Ord. MC-646, passed 12-7-1988; Ord. MC-1605,
passed 2-1-2023)
§ 3.04.100 LOCAL BIDDERS.
   (A)   Any formal or informal bid submitted by a local bidder for goods or
materials, pursuant to this chapter, shall receive a 5% credit for comparison
purposes with other bidders when a local credit is allowable under the law.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, “local bidders” shall be bidders
with:
      (1)   Fixed facilities with employees within the city’s jurisdiction (a
P.O. box or residential address is insufficient unless it is a home-based
business, in which case the residential address may be used); and
      (2)   An appropriate city business license.
(Ord. 2588, passed 6-23-1964; Ord. 3370, passed 8-22-1973; Ord. 3531, passed
10-7-1975; Ord. MC-1605, passed 2-1-2023)
§ 3.04.110 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Ord. MC-608, passed 9-22-1987; Ord. MC-1605, passed 2-1-2023)
§ 3.04.120 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Ord. MC-858, passed 1-12-1993; Ord. MC-1605, passed 2-1-2023)
§ 3.04.130 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Ord. MC-1605, passed 2-1-2023)
§ 3.04.140 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Ord. MC-1605, passed 2-1-2023)
CHAPTER 3.05: BUDGET TRANSFERS
Section
   
3.05.010   Approval of budget transfer
   
3.05.020   Exception; restricted funds
   
3.05.030   Exception; elected officials
   
3.05.040   Mayor and Council approval
   
3.05.050   Transferring restricted funds - violation
§ 3.05.010 APPROVAL OF BUDGET TRANSFER.
   Following approval of the final budget by the Mayor and City Council, the
following types of budget transfer may be made administratively (without action
by the Mayor and City Council) shall be approved or disapproved according to
established finance policies and procedures and on forms approved by the
Department of Finance and Management Services. Only those types of transfers
listed in this section may be made administratively.
   (A)   Budget transfers within a department’s operating (non-personnel salary
or benefits) budget may be made with the approval of the Budget Division.
   (B)   Budget transfers including allocations within the department’s
personnel (salary or benefits) budget may made be with the approval of the
Budget Division, Position Control and the Director of Finance and Management
Services.
   (C)   Budget transfers between departments within the same fund may be made
with the approval of the director of each department, the Budget Division and
the Director of Finance and Management Services.
   (D)   Budget transfers within a department must not increase the
department’s budget.
   (E)   Budget transfers between departments in the same fund will increase or
decrease individual department budgets but shall not increase the fund budget.
   (F)   Any cumulative amount of more than $5,000 transferred between
departments in a 12-month period shall be reported to the Mayor and City
Council during the regular quarterly report.
(Ord. MC-986, passed 12-11-1996; Ord. MC-1568, passed 5-4-2022; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.05.020 EXCEPTION; RESTRICTED FUNDS.
   The authority of §
3.05.010 does not include transfers into or out of funds, the use of which is
restricted by law.
(Ord. MC-986, passed 12-11-1996; Ord. MC-1568, passed 5-4-2022)
§ 3.05.030 EXCEPTION; ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   The authority of §
3.05.010 does not restrict the discretion of elected officials who may transfer
or allocate funds within their departments as they see fit, with notice to the
Director of Finance and Management Services.
(Ord. MC-986, passed 12-11-1996; Ord. MC-1568, passed 5-4-2022; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.05.040 MAYOR AND COUNCIL APPROVAL.
   Any other budget transfers must be approved by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-986, passed 12-11-1996; Ord. MC-1568, passed 5-4-2022)
§ 3.05.050 TRANSFERRING RESTRICTED FUNDS - VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for the City Manager and/or the Director of Finance and
Management Services or anyone under the City Manager’s or Director of Finance
and Management Services’ direction and/or control to transfer restricted funds,
as defined by law or as shall be defined by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council, to any other fund without authorization of the Mayor and City Council
or to pay any bill, invoice or charges from any restricted fund when said bill,
invoice or charges are not appropriate to be paid from any such restricted fund
without said approval.
(Ord. MC-986, passed 12-11-1996; Ord. MC-1568, passed 5-4-2022; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
CHAPTER 3.08: WARRANTS
Section
   
3.08.010   Power of Board of Water Commissioners
   
3.08.020   Procedures for claims for workers’ compensation benefits
§ 3.08.010 POWER OF BOARD OF WATER COMMISSIONERS.
   The City Board of Water Commissioners is empowered to order check warrants
drawn upon the Sewer Fund for expenditures therefrom, including expenditures
properly authorized pursuant to the City Charter, subject to compliance with
the covenants and conditions of all sewer bond issues and any applicable laws,
in the same manner and using the same forms and procedures as in the case of
check warrants drawn on the Water Fund.
(Ord. 3462, passed 12-10-1974)
§ 3.08.020 PROCEDURES FOR CLAIMS FOR WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS.
   The following procedures are established for the processing of claims and
the issuance of checks/warrants for workers’ compensation benefits.
   (A)   The Directors of Emergency Services/Human Resources, or his or her
authorized agent, shall certify and approve claims and demands for the payment
of workers’ compensation benefits as conforming to a budget approved by a
resolution of the Mayor and City Council and shall prepare checks/warrants for
such unaudited claims and demands.
   (B)   The City Treasurer, or his or her authorized agent, shall establish a
special checking account and shall issue checks/warrants for such unaudited
claims and demands.
   (C)   The Director of Finance and Management Services shall audit and
approve such claims and demands and shall certify as to the accuracy of the
claims and demands and the availability of funds for payment thereof and shall
attach the affidavit of such certification to the register of audited demands
before submission to the Mayor and City Council.
   (D)   Budgeted claims or demands paid by checks/warrants prior to audit by
the Director of Finance and Management Services shall be presented to the Mayor
and City Council for ratification and approval at the first meeting after
delivery of the checks/warrants.
(Ord. 3651, passed 6-29-1977; Ord. MC-310, passed 10-25-1983; Ord. MC-342,
passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-
2024)
CHAPTER 3.10: CHECKS RETURNED FOR INSUFFICIENT FUNDS
Section
   
3.10.010   Charge for collection of returned checks
§ 3.10.010 CHARGE FOR COLLECTION OF RETURNED CHECKS.
   A charge of $26 is imposed for the cost of collection of each check payable
to the city in payment of any tax, fee, fine or charge and which is returned by
the city’s depository as being uncollectible for insufficient funds or for
other reasons. The charge of $26 shall be added to all sums due for the tax,
fee, fine or charge. From the time the city is notified of the return of the
check until payment in full is made, including the charge imposed pursuant to
this chapter, the city shall not be obligated to provide or grant to the maker
of the check any services or to permit approval to which the payment relates.
(Ord. 3955, passed 8-8-1980; Ord. MC-703, passed 1-27-1990; Ord. MC-906, passed
6-21-1994)
CHAPTER 3.12: REFUND OF FEES FOR PERMITS, LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES
Section
   
3.12.010   Interpretation of chapter
   
3.12.020   Request for refund
   
3.12.030   Procedure not to bar presentation of claim pursuant to state law
§ 3.12.010 INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER.
   Whenever an application is made to any department or division of a
department of the city for a permit, license or certificate for a building or
structure or for wiring, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning or
refrigeration and a fee is paid and said application is withdrawn or denied,
and a request is made for a refund, the procedure set forth in this chapter
shall govern.
(Ord. 2453, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 3.12.020 REQUEST FOR REFUND.
   The request for a refund must be made on a verified claim and signed by the
original applicant within 60 days after such withdrawal or denial, whichever
occurs first, and must be presented to the department or division of the
department to whom the fee was paid. This department shall then determine, from
a schedule on file in the office of the Department of Building and Safety, the
cost to the city of time spent or expenses incurred by the department or
division. A report of the cost to the city and other relevant data pertaining
to the permit, license or certificate shall be forwarded to the administrative
officer for presentation to the Mayor and City Council; provided he or she
finds said cost and data to be correct and proper in all particulars and
approves the same. A refund shall be made to the applicant of that portion of
the fee paid in excess of such cost.
(Ord. 2453, passed 8-13-2019)
§ 3.12.030 PROCEDURE NOT TO BAR PRESENTATION OF CLAIM PURSUANT TO STATE LAW.
   The procedure established by this chapter for the refund of fees shall not
prevent or bar the presentation or consideration of any claim against the city
in accordance with Cal. Gov’t. Code, §§ 900 et seq. or other state law.
(Ord. 2453, passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 2654, passed 3-9-1965)
CHAPTER 3.13: WAIVER OR REFUND OF FEES FOR CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
3.13.010   Interpretation of chapter
   
3.13.020   Request for waiver or refund
   
3.13.025   Waiver or refund
   
3.13.030   Applicability
§ 3.13.010 INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER.
   Whenever a charitable non-profit organization, corporation, foundation or
religious institution or affiliate thereof, that meets the criteria stated in §
3.13.030, submits an application to any department of the city for a permit,
license or certificate for a building or structure, or for wiring, plumbing,
heating, ventilating, air conditioning or refrigeration, or any other
development permit, or under-grounding of utility costs, or temporary use
permit, or parade permit, and the applicant requests that the fee be waived or
refunded, the procedure set forth in this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. 2453, passed 8-13-1962; Ord. MC-1174, passed 7-22-2004)
§ 3.13.020 REQUEST FOR WAIVER OR REFUND.
   The request for a waiver or a refund must be made on a verified application
signed by the representative of the original applicant and submitted to the
department not later than ten days prior to the event for a fee waiver, and not
later than 60 days after the event for a fee refund. The department shall then
determine which portion, if any, of the fee is not attributable to city
charges, and shall also determine the cost to the city of time spent or to be
spent or expenses incurred or to be incurred by the department. A report of
such costs to the city and other relevant data pertaining to the permit,
license or certificate shall be forwarded to the City Administrator for
presentation to the Mayor, to the Mayor’s designee or to the Mayor and City
Council.
(Ord. 2453, passed 8-13-1962; Ord. MC-1174, passed 7-22-2004)
§ 3.13.025 WAIVER OR REFUND.
   The Mayor and City Council may, in their discretion and taking into
consideration the information provided pursuant to §
3.13.020, waive or refund the established fees where the total amount exceeds
$2,000 per event. The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee may, in his or her
discretion and taking into consideration the information provided pursuant to §
3.13.020, waive or refund temporary use permit fees and related city fees in a
total amount not to exceed $2,000 per event.
(Ord. MC-681, passed 11-8-1989; Ord. MC-1174, passed 7-22-2004)
§ 3.13.030 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all charitable non-profit
organizations, corporations, foundations or religious institutions or
affiliates thereof determined by the Internal Revenue Service to meet the
requirements of 26 U.S.C. § 501(c) or (d) of the Internal Revenue Code.
(Ord. MC-653, passed 3-16-1989; Ord. MC-1174, passed 7-22-2004)
CHAPTER 3.16: CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
Section
   
3.16.010   Filing with City Clerk required
   
3.16.020   Written claim required
   
3.16.030   Action upon claim
   
3.16.040   Commencement of suit
   
3.16.050   Power of City Administrator
   
3.16.060   Claims Review Committee
   
3.16.070   Function of Claims Review Committee
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on claims and actions against public entities, see Cal. Gov’t
Code, §§ 900 et seq.
§ 3.16.010 FILING WITH CITY CLERK REQUIRED.
   The Mayor and City Council, Board of Water Commissioners and the Board of
Trustees of the free public library of the city shall not hear, consider or act
upon any claim which is excepted by Cal. Gov’t. Code, Title 1, Division 3.6,
Part 3, Chapters 1 and 2, in favor of any person, firm or corporation, unless
the same be presented and filed with the City Clerk, or in the case of the
Board of Water Commissioners, with its secretary, in the manner and form
required by law not later than one year after the accrual of the cause of
actions.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921)
§ 3.16.020 WRITTEN CLAIM REQUIRED.
   No suit for money or damages may be brought against the city or its boards,
commissions, officers, employees or agents on a cause of action for which a
claim is required to be presented hereunder until a written claim therefor has
been presented to the city or its appropriate board or commission within the
period of time and in the manner and form required by law and this chapter.
Failure or neglect to comply with this chapter or any provision of law
pertaining to claims against the city and its boards, commissions, officers,
employees or agents shall invalidate the claim and no cause of action shall be
based thereon.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921)
§ 3.16.030 ACTION UPON CLAIM.
   The Mayor and City Council, or the appropriate board or commission, shall
act upon such claim or amended claim within the period of time and in the
manner required and provided in Cal. Gov’t Code, § 912.4, and the consequence
of their or its failure or refusal to act on such claim shall be governed by
the provisions of said section.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921)
§ 3.16.040 COMMENCEMENT OF SUIT.
   Any suit brought against the city, or its boards, commissions, officers,
employees or agents on a cause of action for which a claim is required to be
presented in accordance with this chapter, must be commenced not later than six
months after the date the claim is acted upon by the Mayor and City Council or
appropriate board or commission, or is deemed to have been rejected by the
Mayor and City Council or Board or Commission, in accordance with the Cal.
Gov’t. Code, §§ 945.6 and 946.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921)
§ 3.16.050 POWER OF CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Administrator, or his or her authorized representative, shall
perform each function of the Mayor and City Council under this chapter and
under Cal. Gov’t Code, Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3 (§§ 900 et seq.), any
amendments thereto or other related provisions of law, which relate to any
claim except that he or she shall not allow, compromise or settle any claim
against the city if the amount to be paid pursuant to such allowance,
compromise or settlement exceeds $10,000.
(Ord. MC-638, passed 9-22-1988)
§ 3.16.060 CLAIMS REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   There shall be a claims review committee established consisting of the City
Attorney, City Administrator and the Director of Human Resources and Risk
Management.
(Ord. MC-638, passed 9-22-1988; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.16.070 FUNCTION OF CLAIMS REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   The Claims Review Committee’s function is to review and approve, by
unanimous vote, all settlements above $10,000, but not exceeding $20,000.
(Ord. MC-638, passed 9-22-1988)
CHAPTER 3.20: SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Section
   
3.20.010   Created
   
3.20.020   Payment of monies into fund
   
3.20.030   Expenditure of monies
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on special gas tax street improvement funds, see Cal. Streets
and Highways Code, §§ 186.3, 2106, 2107 and 2113
§ 3.20.010 CREATED.
   To comply with the provisions of the Cal. Streets and Highways Code,
Division 1, Chapter 1, Article 5, with particular reference to the amendments
made thereto by Chapter 642, Statutes of 1935, there is created in the City
Treasury a special fund to be known as the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement
Fund.
(Ord. 1547, passed 6-11-1935; Ord. 1557, passed 1-28-1936)
§ 3.20.020 PAYMENT OF MONIES INTO FUND.
   All monies received by the city from the state under the provisions of the
California Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or
interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of
streets or highways other than state highways, shall be paid into said fund.
(Ord. 1547, passed 6-11-1935; Ord. 1557, passed 1-28-1936)
§ 3.20.030 EXPENDITURE OF MONIES.
   All monies in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes
authorized by, and subject to, all of the provisions of the Cal. Streets and
Highways Code, Division 1, Chapter 1, Article 5.
(Ord. 1547, passed 6-11-1935; Ord. 1557, passed 1-28-1936)
CHAPTER 3.24: TRAFFIC SAFETY FUND
Section
   
3.24.010   Created and established
   
3.24.020   Receipt and expenditure of funds
§ 3.24.010 CREATED AND ESTABLISHED.
   There is created and established a fund to be called the Traffic Safety
Fund, and all funds received under and by virtue of the Cal. Vehicle Code,
Division 18, Chapter 2, § 42200 shall be paid therein, and all expenditures
therefrom shall only be made in accordance with said act.
(Ord. 1816, passed 3-9-1948)
§ 3.24.020 RECEIPT AND EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.
   To comply with the provisions of the Cal. Vehicle Code, Division 18, Chapter
2, § 42200, all funds received and expended under and by virtue of said act,
since September 19, 1947, shall be placed in and expended from the Traffic
Safety Fund.
(Ord. 1816, passed 3-9-1948)
CHAPTER 3.26: TRAFFIC SYSTEMS FEE
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1222, passed 4-6-2006)
CHAPTER 3.27: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Section
   
3.27.000   General findings
   
3.27.010   Purpose and applicability
   
3.27.020   Definitions
   
3.27.030   Law enforcement facilities, vehicles and equipment impact fee -
findings
   
3.27.040   Fire suppression facilities, vehicles and equipment impact fee -
findings
   
3.27.050   Local circulation system impact fee - findings
   
3.27.060   Regional circulation system impact fee - findings
   
3.27.070   Quimby Act Parkland and Open Space Acquisition and Park Improvement
impact fee - findings
   
3.27.075   AB 1600 Parkland and Open Space Acquisition and Park Improvement
impact fee - findings
   
3.27.080   Library facility and collection impact fee - findings
   
3.27.090   Public meeting facilities impact fee - findings
   
3.27.100   Aquatics facilities impact fee - findings
   
3.27.105   Storm drain development impact fee - findings
   
3.27.110   Accounting and disbursement of fees
   
3.27.140   Development fee credits; prepayment
   
3.27.150   Reimbursement
   
3.27.170   Deferrals
   
3.27.180   Application to subsequently annexed land
§ 3.27.000 GENERAL FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find as follows.
   (A)   The provision of new and expanded facilities and infrastructure is
necessary to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of all the
citizens of the city by reducing the adverse effects of urbanization and
development.
   (B)   It is necessary to enact and implement certain development fees to
assure that all development within the city pays its fair share of the costs of
providing necessary public facilities and infrastructure to accommodate such
new development.
   (C)   A proper funding source for the costs associated with new development
is a specific development or facilities fee for each type of facility related
to the specific need created by the development and reasonably related to the
relative cost of providing such necessary public facilities.
   (D)   The Development Impact Fee Calculation and Nexus Report justifies the
imposition of each development fee on new construction by analyzing the Master
Facility Plan, as defined herein, assigning the costs on a fair-share basis to
the various types of development, and assigning the resulting fee per dwelling
unit and/or commercial/industrial square footage, based on the anticipated
burden of such new dwelling unit and/or commercial/industrial area on city
facilities and infrastructure and the need created by such dwelling unit and/or
commercial/industrial area for new and expanded facilities and infrastructure.
   (E)   The primary purpose of the fees is to mitigate the impact on city
facilities and infrastructure caused by increased demand for facilities and
infrastructure from persons generated by new development.
   (F)   The fees will be used to finance public facilities and infrastructure,
specifically local circulation system improvements (streets, traffic signals
and bridges); regional circulation system improvements; law enforcement and
fire protection facilities, vehicles and equipment; library facilities and
collection; public meeting facilities; aquatics facilities; and parkland and
open space acquisition and development.
   (G)   The use of the fees to fund such public facilities and infrastructure
is reasonably related to the impacts of residential development and other
development on the city as more fully described in the Development Impact Fee
Calculation and Nexus Report.
   (H)   The need for development fees to fund such public facilities is
reasonably related to impacts on the city of residential development and other
development as more fully described in the Development Impact Fee Calculation
and Nexus Report.
   (I)   To assure fair and legally sound implementation of the development
fees established in this chapter, such fees shall be reviewed annually and the
amounts of such fees shall be adopted by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council at a public hearing.
   (J)   To assure fair implementation of the development fees established in
this chapter, the city must have the latitude to phase the imposition of
certain fees.
   (K)   To assure fair implementation of the development fees established in
this chapter, the city must have the latitude to defer such fees in special
cases, after notice and hearing, where better or more fair financing
arrangements would result from such deferral.
   (L)   To assure fair implementation of the development fees established by
this chapter, provisions must be made for extending such fees to subsequently
annexed land that benefits from the public facilities funded by these fees.
§ 3.27.010 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council declare the purpose of this chapter is to
provide for the means to finance adequate infrastructure and other public
improvements and facilities made necessary by the impacts created by new
development in the city in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the city. This chapter shall apply solely to construction of
new dwelling units or new commercial or industrial square footage within the
city.
   (B)   The following are specifically exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
      (1)   Additions or improvements to dwelling units after construction is
complete, unless such additions or improvements:
         (a)   Increase the number of dwelling units on the property, as
defined herein; and
         (b)   Are not secondary residential units, as defined herein.
      (2)   Government/public buildings, public schools or other public
facilities;
      (3)   The rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any legal, residential
structure and/or the replacement of a previously existing dwelling unit;
      (4)   The rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any commercial or
industrial structure where there is no net increase in square footage of the
structure. Any increase in square footage of the structure shall pay the
current applicable development impact fees for such increase; and
      (5)   Development projects that are the subject of a development
agreement entered into pursuant to Cal. Gov’t. Code, §§ 65864 et seq., prior to
the initial effective date of this chapter, wherein the imposition of new fees
is expressly prohibited; provided, however, that if the term of such
development agreement is extended after the initial effective date of this
chapter, the development impact fees shall be imposed.
§ 3.27.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFFECTED TERRITORY. The corporate boundaries of the City of San Bernardino
as these may be amended from time to time.
   COMMERCIAL/RETAIL/OFFICE or INDUSTRIAL/MANUFACTURING DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.
The construction of new or additional gross square footage of building area for
commercial (including lodging, schools, religious facilities, hospitals and the
like) retail, office, industrial or manufacturing purposes.
   DEVELOPMENT IMPACT REPORT is the DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE CALCULATION AND
NEXUS REPORT together with the addenda thereto and any subsequent modifications
and/or updates, all of which are on file in the City Clerk’s office. The
original version of the document, dated January 2006, was prepared by Revenue &
Cost Specialists, LLC and summarizes the needed facilities mentioned herein,
their estimated costs and sets forth the required nexus findings.
   DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for
residential occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes, including
single-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings and manufactured housing.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. The date that the fees in this chapter are eligible for
collection, that date being 60 days after the adoption of this chapter.
   MASTER FACILITY PLAN. Together with and subsequent modifications and/or
updates, all of which are on file in the City Clerk’s office, was prepared by
Revenue & Cost Specialists, LLC and describes each of the facilities mentioned
herein and their estimated costs.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. Construction of one or more dwelling units.
   SECONDARY RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A second dwelling unit on the same lot as an
existing primary residential.
(Ord. MC-1238, passed 1-23-2007)
§ 3.27.030 LAW ENFORCEMENT FACILITIES, VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT IMPACT FEE -
FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find as follows.
   (A)   The development of residential, commercial and industrial property in
the affected territory will create a need for increased police protection
services. As a result, additional officers will be needed to maintain the
current level of service. The new officers will require, among other things,
expanded station facilities and additional patrol or unmarked vehicles and
additional police equipment.
   (B)   Pursuant to Article XI, § 7 of the California Constitution, the city
is empowered to enact measures that protect the health, safety and welfare of
its citizens.
   (C)   The provision of expanded station facilities and vehicles is
identified in the “Law Enforcement Facilities” section of the Master Facility
Plan and is necessary to provide adequate law enforcement services.
   (D)   The development impact fee report describes in detail the number of
calls for service that each major category of land use generates on average;
the law enforcement facilities, vehicles and equipment required to service new
development; and estimates of the costs for capital to provide those services.
   (E)   The entire affected territory will derive benefit from the station
facilities and vehicles and should be assessed per the provisions of this
chapter and pay a fair share of the cost thereof based on the benefit derived
therefrom.
   (F)   After consideration of the development impact fee report and testimony
at this public hearing, the Mayor and City Council approve the development
impact fee report and the addendum, and based thereon finds that new
development in the affected territory will create law enforcement needs that
the construction and acquisition of the public improvements funded by this
chapter will meet.
   (G)   The Mayor and City Council also find that the costs of the law
enforcement facilities funded by this chapter are apportioned relative to the
anticipated impacts created by development within the affected territory, and
that the fees are fairly apportioned on individual dwelling units and per
square foot throughout the affected territory on the basis of benefits
conferred on property proposed for development and the need for such facilities
created by the proposed development.
   (H)   The facts and evidence establish that there is a reasonable
relationship between the need for the described public facilities and the needs
created by the types of development on which the fee will be imposed, and that
there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the types of
development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable relationship is
described in more detail in the development impact fee report and the addendum
thereto.
   (I)   The Mayor and City Council also find that the cost estimates set forth
in the development impact fee report are reasonable and will not exceed the
reasonably estimated total of these costs.
   (J)   The law enforcement facilities fees collected pursuant to this chapter
shall be used only to finance the law enforcement facilities described or
identified in the “Law Enforcement Facilities” section of the Master Facility
Plan.
   (K)   The law enforcement facilities fee is imposed on new residential,
commercial and industrial development and the amount of such fee shall be set
by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
§ 3.27.040 FIRE SUPPRESSION FACILITIES, VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT IMPACT FEE -
FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find as follows.
   (A)   The development of residential, commercial and industrial property in
the city will create increased calls for fire protection services. As a result,
new equipment and expansion of existing facilities to house additional
firefighters and equipment will be needed to maintain current levels of
service.
   (B)   Pursuant to Article XI, § 7 of the California Constitution, the city
is empowered to enact measures that protect the health, safety and welfare of
its citizens.
   (C)   The acquisition of new equipment and relocation, expansion and
construction of fire protection facilities are identified in the “Fire
Protection Facilities” section of the Master Facility Plan and are necessary to
provide adequate fire protection services within the city.
   (D)   The development impact fee report and the addendum thereto describe in
detail the number of calls for service that each major category of land use
generates, the fire protection facilities required to service new development
and estimates of the costs of those facilities.
   (E)   The entire affected territory will derive benefit from the new
equipment and relocated, expanded and newly-constructed fire station facilities
and should be assessed per the provisions of this chapter and pay a fair share
of the cost thereof based on the benefit derived therefrom.
   (F)   After consideration of the development impact fee report and the
addendum thereto and testimony at this public hearing, the Mayor and City
Council approve the development impact fee report and the addendum thereto, and
based thereon finds that new development in the city will create fire
protection needs that the construction and acquisition of the public
improvements funded by this chapter will meet.
   (G)   The Mayor and City Council also find that the costs of the equipment
and expanded fire protection facilities funded by this chapter are apportioned
relative to the anticipated impacts created by development within the affected
territory, and that the fees are fairly apportioned on individual dwelling
units throughout the affected territory on the basis of benefits conferred on
property proposed for development and the need for such facilities created by
the proposed development.
   (H)   The facts and evidence establish that there is a reasonable
relationship between the need for the described public facilities and the needs
created by the types of development on which the fee will be imposed, and that
there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the types of
development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable relationship is
described in more detail in the development impact fee report and the addendum
thereto.
   (I)   The Mayor and City Council also find that the cost estimates set forth
in the development impact fee report are reasonable and will not exceed the
reasonably estimated total of these costs.
   (J)   The fire protection fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be
used only to finance the fire protection facilities described or identified in
the “Fire Protection Facilities” section of the Master Facility Plan.
   (K)   The fire suppression facilities fee is imposed on new residential,
commercial and industrial development and the amount of such fee shall be set
by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
§ 3.27.050 LOCAL CIRCULATION SYSTEM IMPACT FEE - FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find as follows.
   (A)   The development of residential and other property in the affected
territory will generate additional vehicle travel. This traffic will create a
need for expansion of existing streets, signals and bridges to accommodate
increased traffic from new residential development and commercial/industrial
development.
   (B)   The Master Facility Plan establishes the costs and a fair method for
the allocation of costs and fee apportionment, and the apportioned fees are
applicable to all property within the affected territory.
   (C)   The provision of expanded streets, signals and bridges is identified
in the “Circulation System” section of the Master Facility Plan and is
necessary to provide adequate streets and roadways services within the city.
   (D)   The general plan of the city includes and identifies in the
“Circulation Element” and the transportation provision thereof, among other
things, streets, signals and bridges within the city with the primary purpose
of carrying through traffic and providing a network connecting to the state
highway system.
   (E)   The entire affected territory will derive benefit from the
construction or reconstruction of streets, signals and bridges and should be
assessed per the provisions of this chapter and pay a fair share of the cost
thereof based on the benefit derived therefrom.
   (F)   After consideration of the development impact fee report, the addendum
thereto and testimony at this public hearing, the Mayor and City Council
approve the development impact fee report and the addendum, and based thereon
finds that new development in the affected territory will create streets and
roadways needs that the construction and acquisition of the public improvements
funded by this chapter will meet.
   (G)   The Mayor and City Council also find that the cost of the streets,
signals and bridges funded by this chapter is apportioned relative to the
anticipated contribution to traffic created by residential and other
development in the affected territory, and that the fees are fairly apportioned
on individual dwelling units and commercial/industrial space throughout the
affected territory on the basis of benefits conferred on property to be
developed and the need for such streets and roadways created by such
development.
   (H)   The facts and evidence establish that there is a reasonable
relationship between the need for the described public facilities and the needs
created by the types of development on which the fee will be imposed, and that
there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the types of
development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable relationship is
described in more detail in the development fee impact report and the addendum
thereto.
   (I)   The cost estimates set forth in the development impact fees report are
reasonable cost estimates for constructing or reconstructing the streets and
roadways proposed therein and the fees collected from residential and other
development will not exceed the reasonably estimated total of these costs.
   (J)   The streets, signals and bridges fees collected pursuant to this
chapter shall be used only to finance the streets and roadways described or
identified in the “Circulation System” section of the Master Facility Plan.
   (K)   The local circulation systems fee is imposed on new residential,
commercial and industrial development, and the amount of such fee shall be set
by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
§ 3.27.060 REGIONAL CIRCULATION SYSTEM IMPACT FEE - FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find as follows.
   (A)   The development of residential and other property in the affected
territory will generate additional vehicle travel, which impacts regional
circulation systems. This traffic will create a need for regional
transportation system improvements, such as freeway interchanges, railroad
grade separations and regional arterial highways, to accommodate increased
traffic from new residential development and commercial/industrial development.
   (B)   The Master Facility Plan establishes the costs and a fair method for
the allocation of new development’s share of regional circulation system
improvement costs and fee apportionment, and the apportioned fees are
applicable to all property within the affected territory.
   (C)   The provision of regional circulation system improvements is
identified in the “Circulation System” section of the Master Facility Plan and
is necessary to mitigate the impacts of development upon the regional
circulation system within the city as contained in Appendix K of the County
Congestion Management Plan.
   (D)   The SANBAG Development Mitigation Nexus Study identifies the required
development contribution levels or fair share amounts for each city and sphere
of influence, and the city’s regional circulation system impact fee will
provide sufficient revenue to meet or exceed the required amounts.
   (E)   The entire affected territory will derive benefit from the
construction or reconstruction of regional circulation system improvements and
should be assessed per the provisions of this chapter and pay a fair share of
the cost thereof based on the benefit derived therefrom.
   (F)   After consideration of the development impact fee report, the addendum
thereto and testimony at this public hearing, the Mayor and City Council
approve the development impact fee report and the addendum, and based thereon,
finds that new development in the affected territory will create regional
circulation system needs that the construction and acquisition of the public
improvements funded by this chapter and Measure I 2010-2040 will meet
mitigation needs.
   (G)   The Mayor and City Council also find that the share of regional
circulation system improvements funded by this chapter is apportioned relative
to the anticipated contribution to traffic created by residential and other
development in the affected territory, and that the fees are fairly apportioned
on individual dwelling units and commercial/industrial space throughout the
affected territory on the basis of benefits conferred on property to be
developed and the need for such regional circulation system improvements
created by such development.
   (H)   The facts and evidence establish that there is a reasonable
relationship between the need for the described regional circulation system
improvements and the needs created by the types of development on which the fee
will be imposed, and that there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s
use and the types of development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable
relationship is described in more detail in the development fee impact report
and the addendum thereto.
   (I)   The cost estimates set forth in the development impact fees report are
reasonable cost estimates for constructing or reconstructing the freeway
interchanges, railroad grade separations and regional arterial highways
proposed therein and the fees collected from residential and other development
will not exceed the reasonably estimated total of these costs.
   (J)   The regional circulation system fees collected pursuant to this
chapter shall be used only to finance the city’s fair share of the regional
circulation system improvements described or identified in the “Circulation
System” section of the Master Facility Plan.
   (K)   The regional circulation systems fee is imposed on new residential,
commercial and industrial development, and the amount of such fee shall be set
by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (L)   In accordance with Appendix J of the San Bernardino County Congestion
Management Plan, the Mayor and City Council shall update regional circulation
system project cost estimates on an annual basis, and adjust the regional
circulation systems fee based on the updated estimates. The fee adjustments
will be based on an escalation factor approved by the SANBAG Board of
Directors.
§ 3.27.070 QUIMBY ACT PARKLAND AND OPEN SPACE ACQUISITION AND PARK IMPROVEMENT
IMPACT FEE - FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find as follows.
   (A)   The development of residential and other property in the affected
territory will create a need for the construction of park and open space
facilities to maintain the current level of service. The park and open space
facilities for which payment of a fee and/or dedication of land is required by
this section shall be in compliance with the policies, goals and standards
contained in the “Parks and Recreation Element” of the general plan.
   (B)   Pursuant to the Quimby Act (Cal. Gov’t Code, § 66477), the city may
impose by ordinance a requirement for the payment of fees to pay for the actual
or estimated costs of constructing planned park and open space facilities.
   (C)   Pursuant to Article XI, § 7 of the California Constitution, the city
is empowered to enact measures that protect the health, safety and welfare of
its citizens.
   (D)   Park and open space facilities are essential to the city to mitigate
the negative effects of increasing urban development and to promote the health
and welfare of the citizens.
   (E)   The provision of additional parks, recreation and open space is
identified in the “Parkland and Open Space Acquisition and Park Improvement”
section of the Master Facility Plan and is necessary to provide adequate parks
and open space facilities within the city.
   (F)   The development impact fee report and addendum thereto describe in
detail the current city standards for parks and open space facilities, the cost
for parks and open space facilities construction and the cost thereof per new
single-family, multi-family and mobile home park or manufactured home park
residential unit.
   (G)   The entire affected territory will derive benefit from the park and
open space facilities and should be assessed per the provisions of this chapter
and pay a fair share of the cost thereof based on the benefit derived
therefrom.
   (H)   After consideration of the development impact fee report, the addendum
thereto and testimony at this public hearing, the Mayor and City Council
approve the development impact fee report and the addendum thereto, and based
thereon finds that new development in the affected territory will create needs
for park and open space facilities that the construction and acquisition of the
public improvements funded by this chapter will meet anticipated impacts of
development.
   (I)   The costs of the park, recreation and open space facilities funded by
this chapter are apportioned relative to the anticipated impacts created by
development within the affected territory, and that the fees are fairly
apportioned on individual dwelling units throughout the affected territory on
the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for development and the
need for such facilities created by such proposed development.
   (J)   The facts and evidence establish that there is a reasonable
relationship between the need for the described public facilities and the needs
created by the types of development on which the fee will be imposed, and that
there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the types of
development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable relationship is
described in more detail in the development impact fee report and the addendum
thereto.
   (K)   The cost estimates set forth in the development impact fee report are
reasonable and will not exceed the reasonably estimated total of these costs.
   (L)   The park and open space facilities fees collected pursuant to this
chapter shall be used only to finance the park and open space facilities
described or identified in the “Parkland and Open Space Acquisition and Park
Improvement” section of the Master Facility Plan.
   (M)   The park and open space land acquisition and facilities development
fee is imposed on new residential development. The amount of such fee shall be
set by resolution of the Mayor and City Council, and shall apply to development
of residential uses requiring the subdivision of land. Developments of
residential uses not requiring the subdivision of land shall pay the AB 1600
Park and Open Space Land Acquisition and Facilities Development Fee in
accordance with §
3.27.075.
      (1)   The subdivider, as a condition of approval of a tentative map,
shall pay a fee in lieu, dedicate land or both, at the discretion of the
Council for park and/or recreational purposes pursuant to the Subdivision Map
Act, Cal. Gov’t Code, § 66477.
      (2)   It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience,
health, safety and welfare require that five acres of land for each 1,000
persons residing within the city be devoted to park and recreational purposes.
Lands held as public open space for wildlife habitat shall not be included in
this formula.
      (3)   (a)   Where a public park or recreational facility has been
designated in the general plan and is to be located in whole or in part within
the proposed subdivision and is reasonably related to serving the needs of the
residents of that subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for park and
recreational facilities sufficient in size and physical characteristics to meet
that purpose. The amount of land shall be determined pursuant to division (M)
(4) below.
         (b)   If there is no park or recreational facility designated in the
general plan to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision
to serve the needs of the residents of that subdivision, the subdivider shall,
pursuant to Council determination, pay a fee in lieu of or dedicate land in
compliance with division (M)(4) below.
      (4)   The Council shall consider the following when evaluating the
payment of fee in lieu of or the acceptance of land for dedication, or a
combination of both:
         (a)   “Parks and Recreation Element,” and any other applicable
provision of the general plan;
         (b)   Topography, geology, access and location of land in the
subdivision suitable for dedication;
         (c)   Size and shape of the subdivision and land suitable for
dedication;
         (d)   Feasibility of dedication; and
         (e)   Availability of previously acquired private property.
§ 3.27.075 AB 1600 PARKLAND AND OPEN SPACE ACQUISITION AND PARK IMPROVEMENT
IMPACT FEE - FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find as follows.
   (A)   The development of residential and other property in the affected
territory will create a need for the construction of park and open space
facilities to maintain the current level of service. The park and open space
facilities for which payment of a fee and/or dedication of land is required by
this section shall be in compliance with the policies, goals and standards
contained in the “Parks and Recreation Element” of the general plan.
   (B)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 66000 et seq. and the city’s police
powers, the city may impose, by ordinance, a requirement for the payment of
fees to pay for the actual or estimated costs of constructing planned park and
open space facilities.
   (C)   Pursuant to Article XI, § 7 of the California Constitution, the city
is empowered to enact measures that protect the health, safety and welfare of
its citizens.
   (D)   Park and open space facilities are essential to the city to mitigate
the negative effects of increasing urban development and to promote the health
and welfare of the citizens.
   (E)   The provision of additional parks, recreation and opera space is
identified in the “Parkland and Open Space Acquisition and Park Improvement”
section of the Master Facility Plan and is necessary to provide adequate parks
and open space facilities within the city.
   (F)   The development impact fee report and addendum thereto describe in
detail the current city standards for parks and open space facilities, the cost
for parks and open space facilities construction and the cost thereof per new
single-family, multi-family and mobile home park residential unit.
   (G)   The entire affected territory will derive benefit from the park and
open space facilities and should be assessed per the provisions of this chapter
and pay a fair share of the cost thereof based on the benefit derived
therefrom.
   (H)   After consideration of the development impact fee report, the addendum
thereto and testimony at this public hearing, the Mayor and City Council
approve the development impact fee report and the addendum thereto, and based
thereon, find that new development in the affected territory will create needs
for park and open space facilities that the construction and acquisition of the
public improvements funded by this chapter will meet.
   (I)   The costs of the park, recreation and open space facilities funded by
this chapter are apportioned relative to the anticipated impacts created by
development within the affected territory, and that the fees are fairly
apportioned on individual dwelling units throughout the affected territory on
the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for development and the
need for such facilities created by such proposed development.
   (J)   The facts and evidence establish that there is a reasonable
relationship between the need for the described public facilities and the needs
created by the types of development on which the fee will be imposed, and that
there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the types of
development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable relationship is
described in more detail in the development impact fee report and the addendum
thereto.
   (K)   The cost estimates set forth in the development impact fee report are
reasonable and will not exceed the reasonably estimated total of these costs.
   (L)   The park and open space facilities fees collected pursuant to this
chapter shall be used only to finance the park and open space facilities
described or identified in the “Parkland and Open Space Acquisition and Park
Improvement” section of the Master Facility Plan.
   (M)   The AB 1600 Park and Open Space Land Acquisition and Facilities
Development Fee is imposed on new residential development. The amount of such
fee shall be set by resolution of the Mayor and City Council, and shall apply
to developments of residential uses not requiring the subdivision of land.
Developments requiring the subdivision of land shall pay the Quimby Act Park
and Open Space Land Acquisition and Facilities Development Fees pursuant to §
3.27.070.
      (1)   It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience,
health, safety and welfare require that five acres of land for each 1,000
persons residing within the city be devoted to park and recreational purposes.
Lands held as public open space for wildlife habitat shall not be included in
this formula.
      (2)   The Council shall consider the following when evaluating the
payment of fee in lieu of or the acceptance of land for dedication, or a
combination of both:
         (a)   “Parks and Recreation Element,” and any other applicable
provision of the general plan;
         (b)   Topography, geology, access and location of land in the
subdivision suitable for dedication;
         (c)   Size and shape of the subdivision and land suitable for
dedication;
         (d)   Feasibility of dedication; and
         (e)   Availability of previously acquired private property.
Statutory reference:
   Quimby Act, see Cal. Gov’t Code, § 66477
§ 3.27.080 LIBRARY FACILITY AND COLLECTION IMPACT FEE - FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find as follows.
   (A)   The development of residential property in the affected territory will
create a need for increased library services. As a result, additions to the
library collection will be needed to maintain the current level of service.
   (B)   Pursuant to Article XI, § 7 of the California Constitution, the city
is empowered to enact measures that protect the health, safety and welfare of
its citizens.
   (C)   The provision of additions to the library collection is identified in
the “Library Facility and Collection” section of the Master Facility Plan and
is necessary to provide adequate library services within the city.
   (D)   The development impact fee report describes, in detail, the current
city standard for number of library books per person; the number of persons an
average single-family, multiple-family or mobile home park residence generates;
the library collection required to service new development; and estimates of
the costs of additions to the library collection to maintain the current level
of service.
   (E)   The entire affected territory will derive benefit from the library
collection and should be assessed per the provisions of this chapter and pay a
fair share of the cost thereof based on the benefit derived therefrom.
   (F)   After consideration of the development impact fee report and testimony
at a public hearing, the Mayor and City Council approve the development impact
fee report, and based thereon, finds that new development in the affected
territory will create needs for additions to the library collection that the
acquisition of the public improvements funded by this chapter will meet.
   (G)   The Mayor and City Council also finds that the costs of additions to
the library collection funded by this chapter are apportioned relative to the
anticipated impacts created by development within the affected territory, and
that the fees are fairly apportioned on individual dwelling units throughout
the affected territory on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed
for development and the need for such facilities created by the proposed
development.
   (H)   The facts and evidence establish that there is a reasonable
relationship between the need for the described public facilities and the needs
created by the types of development on which the fee will be imposed, and that
there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the types of
development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable relationship is
described in more detail in the development impact fee report.
   (I)   The City Council also finds that the cost estimates set forth in the
development impact fee report are reasonable and will not exceed the reasonably
estimated total of these costs.
   (J)   The library collection fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall
be used only to finance additions to the library collection described or
identified in the “Library Facility and Collection” section of the Master
Facility Plan.
   (K)   The library facilities and collection fee is imposed on new
residential development, and the amount of such fee shall be set by resolution
of the Mayor and City Council.
§ 3.27.090 PUBLIC MEETING FACILITIES IMPACT FEE - FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find as follows.
   (A)   The development of residential property in the affected territory will
create a need for increased public meeting facilities. As a result, additional
public meeting facilities will be needed to maintain the current level of
service.
   (B)   Pursuant to Article XI, § 7 of the California Constitution, the city
is empowered to enact measures that protect the health, safety and welfare of
its citizens.
   (C)   The provision of public meeting facilities is identified in the
“Public Use Facilities” section of the Master Facility Plan and is necessary to
provide adequate public meeting facilities within the city.
   (D)   The development impact fee report describes in detail the current city
standard for number of public meeting facilities per person; the number of
persons an average single-family, multiple-family or mobile home park residence
generates; the public meeting facilities required to service new development;
and estimates of the costs of public meeting facilities to maintain the current
level of service.
   (E)   The entire affected territory will derive benefit from the public
meeting facilities and should be assessed per the provisions of this chapter
and pay a fair share of the cost thereof based on the benefit derived
therefrom.
   (F)   After consideration of the development impact fee report and testimony
at a public hearing, the Mayor and City Council approves the development impact
fee report, and based thereon finds that new development in the affected
territory will create needs for public meeting facilities that the acquisition
of the public improvements funded by this chapter will meet.
   (G)   The Mayor and City Council also find that the costs of public meeting
facilities funded by this chapter are apportioned relative to the anticipated
impacts created by development within the affected territory, and that the fees
are fairly apportioned on individual dwelling units throughout the affected
territory on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for
development and the need for such facilities created by the proposed
development.
   (H)   The facts and evidence establish that there is a reasonable
relationship between the need for the described public facilities and the needs
created by the types of development on which the fee will be imposed, and that
there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the types of
development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable relationship is
described in more detail in the development impact fee report.
   (I)   The Mayor and City Council also find that the cost estimates set forth
in the development impact fee report are reasonable and will not exceed the
reasonably estimated total of these costs.
   (J)   The public meeting facilities fees collected pursuant to this chapter
shall be used only to finance additions to the public meeting facilities
described or identified in the “Community Public Use Facilities” section of the
Master Facility Plan.
   (K)   The public meeting facilities impact fee is imposed on new residential
development, and the amount of such fee shall be set by resolution of the Mayor
and City Council.
§ 3.27.100 AQUATICS FACILITIES IMPACT FEE - FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find as follows.
   (A)   The development of residential property in the affected territory will
create a need for increased aquatics facilities. As a result, additional
aquatics facilities will be needed to maintain the current level of service.
   (B)   Pursuant to Article XI, § 7 of the California Constitution, the city
is empowered to enact measures that protect the health, safety and welfare of
its citizens.
   (C)   The provision of aquatic center facilities is identified in the
“Aquatic Center Facilities” section of the Master Facility Plan and is
necessary to provide adequate aquatic center facilities within the city.
   (D)   The development impact fee report describes in detail the current city
standard for aquatic center facilities per person; the number of persons an
average single-family, multiple-family or mobile home park residence generates;
the aquatic center facilities required to service new development; and
estimates of the costs of aquatic center facilities to maintain the current
level of service.
   (E)   The entire affected territory will derive benefit from the aquatic
center facilities and should be assessed per the provisions of this chapter and
pay a fair share of the cost thereof based on the benefit derived therefrom.
   (F)   After consideration of the development impact fee report and testimony
at a public hearing, the Mayor and City Council approve the development impact
fee report, and based thereon finds that new development in the affected
territory will create needs for aquatic center facilities that the acquisition
of the public improvements funded by this chapter will meet.
   (G)   The Mayor and City Council also find that the costs of aquatic center
facilities funded by this chapter are apportioned relative to the anticipated
impacts created by development within the affected territory, and that the fees
are fairly apportioned on individual dwelling units throughout the affected
territory on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for
development and the need for such facilities created by the proposed
development.
   (H)   The facts and evidence establish that there is a reasonable
relationship between the need for the described public facilities and the needs
created by the types of development on which the fee will be imposed, and that
there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the types of
development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable relationship is
described in more detail in the development impact fee report.
   (I)   The Mayor and City Council also find that the cost estimates set forth
in the development impact fee report are reasonable and will not exceed the
reasonably estimated total of these costs.
   (J)   The aquatic center facilities fees collected pursuant to this chapter
shall be used only to finance additions to the community’s aquatic center
facilities described or identified in the “Aquatic Center Facilities” section
of the Master Facility Plan.
   (K)   The aquatic center facilities impact fee is imposed on new residential
development, and the amount of such fee shall be set by resolution of the Mayor
and City Council.
§ 3.27.105 STORM DRAIN DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE - FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find as follows.
   (A)   The development of residential and other property in the affected
territory will generate the need for additional storm drainage structures and
improvements to handle runoff from surface and storm waters. As a result, the
addition of storm drainage facilities will be needed to maintain the current
level of service.
   (B)   Pursuant to Article XI, § 7 of the California Constitution, the city
is empowered to enact measures that protect the health, safety and welfare of
its citizens.
   (C)   The provision of storm drainage facilities is identified in the “Storm
Drainage Facilities” section of the Master Facility Plan and is necessary to
provide adequate storm drainage facilities within the city.
   (D)   The development impact fee report describes in detail the additional
storm drainage facilities needed for the affected territory and estimates of
the costs for those facilities.
   (E)   The entire affected territory will derive benefit from the storm
drainage facilities and should be assessed per the provisions of this chapter
and pay a fair share of the cost thereof based on the benefit derived
therefrom.
   (F)   After consideration of the development impact fee report and the
addendum thereto and testimony at this public hearing, the Mayor and City
Council approves the development impact fee report and the addendum thereto,
and based thereon, finds that new residential and other development in the
affected territory will create storm drainage impacts which the installation of
storm drainage facilities funded by this chapter will offset.
   (G)   The Mayor and City Council also find that the costs of the storm
drainage facilities funded by this chapter are apportioned relative to the
anticipated impacts created by residential and other development within the
affected territory, and that the fees are fairly apportioned on individual
dwelling units and/or commercial/industrial square footage, throughout the
affected territory on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for
residential and other development and the need for such facilities created by
the proposed development.
   (H)   The facts and evidence establish that there is a reasonable
relationship between the need for the described public facilities and the needs
created by the types of development on which the fee will be imposed, and that
there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the types of
development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable relationship is
described in more detail in the development fee impact report and the addendum
thereto.
   (I)   The Mayor and City Council also find that the cost estimates set forth
in the development impact fee report are reasonable and will not exceed the
reasonably estimated total of these costs.
   (J)   The storm drain development impact fee is imposed on new residential,
commercial and industrial development, and the amount of such fee shall be set
by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-1238, passed 1-23-2007)
§ 3.27.110 ACCOUNTING AND DISBURSEMENT OF FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Each of the fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be placed
in a separate fund, each of which may be further segregated by specific
projects.
      (2)   These funds shall be known, respectively, as:
         (a)   The Law Enforcement Development Fee Fund;
         (b)   The Fire Protection Development Fee Fund;
         (c)   The Local Circulation System Development Fee Fund;
         (d)   The Regional Circulation System Development Fee Fund;
         (e)   The Quimby Act Parkland and Open Space Acquisition and Park
Improvement Development Fee Fund;
         (f)   The AB 1600 Parkland and Open Space Acquisition and Park
Improvement Development Fee Fund;
         (g)   The Library Facilities and Collection Development Fee Fund;
         (h)   The Public Meeting Facilities Development Fee Fund;
         (i)   The Aquatics Center Facilities Development Fee Fund; and
         (j)   The Storm Drainage Impact Fee Fund.
   (B)   These funds, and interest earned thereon, shall be expended solely for
construction and/or acquisition of the corresponding public facilities as shown
in the Master Facility Plan, or for reimbursement for construction and/or
acquisition of those public facilities.
(Ord. MC-1238, passed 1-23-2007)
Statutory reference:
   Quimby Act, see Cal. Gov’t Code, § 66477
§ 3.27.140 DEVELOPMENT FEE CREDITS; PREPAYMENT.
   (A)   The owner of a parcel of property otherwise required to pay a fee
under this chapter shall receive a credit for the corresponding development fee
when that owner constructs or donates a facility, or a portion thereof,
identified in the Master Facility Plan, regardless of how it may be financed,
that serves the owner’s parcel or parcels. The development fee credit shall
offset, on a proportionate basis without interest, the corresponding
development fee to be paid pursuant to this chapter. The facility must be built
in compliance with all applicable laws governing the construction of public
improvements.
   (B)   The amount of the development fee credit shall equal the city’s most
recent estimated cost of constructing and/or furnishing the facility, or the
portion of the facility actually completed or purchased, by contract or
utilizing city forces.
   (C)   The owner of a parcel of property may be further entitled to a
development fee credit where the city determines, on a case-by-case basis, that
the construction of the facility, or a portion thereof, will be necessary to
provide basic services to the entire city even though it does not directly
serve the owner’s project or is of greater capacity than that required to serve
the owner’s project adequately.
   (D)   The amount of the development fee credit shall be determined after
inspection and acceptance of the facility at the time of payment of the
corresponding facilities fee.
   (E)   If an owner pays the facilities fee assessed under this chapter and
later elects, after city approval, to accelerate the development by
constructing or purchasing facilities for the project, the owner may apply for
and receive a refund, up to the amount of the facilities fee, for such
facilities after those facilities are certified by the City Engineer as
complying with the appropriate Master Facility Plan, city ordinances and
applicable law.
   (F)   To the extent that an owner is granted a development fee credit, such
owner shall not be entitled to a future reimbursement for such facility except
as provided in §
3.27.150.
   (G)   A development fee credit is an obligation of the city that runs with
the land and inures to the benefit of each successor in interest of the
original landowner until full credit has been received.
   (H)   A developer shall also be entitled to a credit if the city and
developer have executed an agreement or there is a preexisting ordinance which
specifically exempts the developer from the payment of one or more of the fees
enacted under this chapter. The availability of the credit and its amount shall
be determined by the city on a case-by-case basis based on the provisions of
the applicable agreement.
   (I)   A developer or any public agency may prepay all or any portion of one
or more fees under this chapter through the use of funds, revenues or grants
that are derived from sources other than those of the city or revenues
generated from the fees collected under this chapter. The Mayor and City
Council are authorized to enter agreements with developers or public agencies
to accept any prepayments of one or more of the fees under this chapter based
upon findings and determinations to be made by the Mayor and City Council to
acknowledge said prepayment and to approve any agreement with any developer or
public agency to evidence such prepayment.
§ 3.27.150 REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   The owner of a parcel of property otherwise required to pay a
facilities fee under this chapter will be entitled to enter into a
reimbursement agreement to reimburse from subsequently collected development
fees the direct and verifiable costs of installing or furnishing public
improvements, or portions thereof, identified in the appropriate Master
Facility Plan where all of the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The owner has constructed a public improvement, or portion thereof,
that is identified in the appropriate Master Facility Plan;
      (2)   The city required that the public improvement be constructed to
contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of
property not within the owner’s project;
      (3)   The city approved, prior to construction or furnishing, the
proposed budget for the project and finds any change to that budget fair and
reasonable;
      (4)   The public improvement, or portion thereof, has been dedicated to
the public; and
      (5)   The public improvement, or portion thereof, has been built in
compliance with all applicable laws governing the construction of public works.
   (B)   The city shall not reimburse the owner for costs related to financing
any public facility.
   (C)   An owner shall only be entitled to reimbursement to the extent that
any public facility project benefits property not within the owner’s project.
Thus, an owner may receive a development fee credit, as provided in §
3.27.140, for the portion of a public facility that serves the owner’s project
and reimbursement for the oversized or extra-capacity or extended portion of a
public facility that benefits subsequently developed property.
   (D)   In no event shall an owner receive a development fee credit and/or
reimbursement in excess of the city’s most recent estimated cost of
constructing the facility, or the portion of the facility actually completed,
by contract or by utilizing city forces.
   (E)   Any reimbursement agreement entered into under this section shall
require the city, for a period of up to 15 years, to reimburse the owner from
the proceeds of the facilities fees collected from new projects that directly
benefit from the facilities financed by the facilities fee or fees and which
are the subject of the reimbursement agreement. Reimbursement shall only be
made from fees collected to fund improvements which are of the same type as the
improvement constructed by the owner, and from no other source. The terms of
the reimbursement shall be set forth in the reimbursement agreement.
§ 3.27.170 DEFERRALS.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council are empowered to grant deferral of any fee
imposed by this chapter upon the recommendation of the Director of Development
Services, except the regional circulation systems fee established in §
3.27.060. Such deferral may only be granted after notice and hearing if, in the
opinion of the Mayor and City Council, properly supported by specific findings,
deferral would allow a better or fairer financing arrangement to be developed
and imposed. Findings must be based on written and other evidence submitted by
the property owner, substantiating the owner’s contention that the fee should
be deferred.
   (B)   Findings must include facts supporting deferral, including, without
limitation, findings that in the case of deferral:
      (1)   Other properties to be benefitted by any fee will not be burdened
by the review and delay in fee imposition;
      (2)   Alternative financing methods involving more than one owner have
been proposed for review; or
      (3)   Delay will result in a more fair funding arrangement.
§ 3.27.180 APPLICATION TO SUBSEQUENTLY ANNEXED LAND.
   As areas not presently situated within the city boundaries seek to annex to
the city, the Mayor and City Council shall determine the benefit to such land
areas of the public facilities and infrastructure funded by this chapter. The
Mayor and City Council shall impose development fees, in whole or in part, as
established by this chapter, upon such annexed areas to the extent necessary to
assure that such areas pay their fair share of the actual costs of all
necessary public facilities and infrastructure benefitting their projects,
unless the Mayor and City Council determines that such an imposition would
cause inequities or that a better or fairer financing arrangement can and
should be developed and imposed.
(Ord. MC-1222, passed 4-6-2006)
CHAPTER 3.28: SPECIAL PUBLIC HEALTH FUND
Section
   
3.28.010   Created and established
   
3.28.020   Receipt and expenditure of funds
§ 3.28.010 CREATED AND ESTABLISHED.
   There is created and established a fund to be called the Special Public
Health Fund, and all funds received under and by virtue of the Cal. Health and
Safety Code, Division 101, Part 3, Chapter 3 and § 1327, Title 17, “Public
Health” of Cal. Code of Regulations, and all expenditures therefrom shall only
be made in accordance with said act.
(Ord. 1825, passed 4-27-1948)
§ 3.28.020 RECEIPT AND EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.
   To comply with the provisions of § 1327, Title 17, “Public Health” of Cal.
Code of Regulations, all funds received and expended under and by virtue of
said act since May 1, 1948 shall be placed in and expended from the Special
Public Health Fund.
(Ord. 1825, passed 4-27-1948)
CHAPTER 3.32: PUBLIC PARK DEVELOPMENT AND RECREATION FUND
Section
   
3.32.010   Created and established
   
3.32.020   Transfer of money
§ 3.32.010 CREATED AND ESTABLISHED.
   There is created and established a fund to be called the Public Park
Development and Recreation Fund. All expenditures from said fund shall be for
the extension and development of the public park system of the city and for the
construction and reconstruction of facilities for public recreation; the
construction of recreation buildings with equipment, apparatus and furniture
therefor; and including, for the foregoing, the acquisition of any land,
property, easements, rights-of-way, equipment, apparatus and other property
necessary therefor.
(Ord. 2374, passed 7-24-1961; Ord. 2743, passed 5-17-1966)
§ 3.32.020 TRANSFER OF MONEY.
   Each and every year the Mayor and City Council shall fix and establish for
the General Fund at least $0.04 tax per $100 assessed valuation and the amount
derived from said tax shall be transferred during the same fiscal year from the
General Fund to the Public Park Development and Recreation Fund.
(Ord. 2374, passed 7-24-1961; Ord. 2743, passed 5-17-1966)
CHAPTER 3.36: CEMETERY FUND
Section
   
3.36.010   Endowment Care Fund and Capital Improvement Fund created
   
3.36.020   Cemetery Fund established
   
3.36.030   Duty of City Treasurer
Cross-reference:
   For provisions on the city cemetery, see
Chapter 2.44
§ 3.36.010 ENDOWMENT CARE FUND AND CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND CREATED.
   (A)   There are created the Cemetery Endowment Care Fund and the Cemetery
Capital Improvement Fund. All sums of money received from the sale of interment
lots or plots, or from cemetery endowment care contracts, shall be deposited in
the Cemetery Endowment Care Fund; provided that the sum of $35 received from
the sale of, or an endowment care contract for, any such lot or plot shall be
deposited in the Cemetery Capital Improvement Fund. Money in the Cemetery
Capital Improvement Fund shall be expended only for cemetery capital
improvements recommended by the Cemetery Commission and approved by the Mayor
and City Council.
   (B)   Earnings from the Cemetery Endowment Care Fund shall be deposited and
used exclusively for the care of the lots, exclusive of any driveways or
pathways for which endowment care has been contracted.
(Ord. 858, passed 4-11-1922; Ord. 3641, passed 5-25-1977)
§ 3.36.020 CEMETERY FUND ESTABLISHED.
   There is established a Cemetery Fund. All sums of money received by the
Commission otherwise than as provided for in §
3.36.010 shall be paid into this fund, and out of this fund shall be paid all
costs and expenses of maintaining the Pioneer Cemetery.
(Ord. 858, passed 4-11-1922)
§ 3.36.030 DUTY OF CITY TREASURER.
   All of the funds enumerated in this chapter shall be kept by the City
Treasurer, and any and all payments made therefrom shall be made upon the order
of the Mayor and City Council or the City Treasurer when so authorized. Said
funds shall be kept on deposit in accordance with the laws pertaining to the
depositing of other city public funds, and the Mayor and City Council or the
City Treasurer may invest and reinvest said funds or such portion as they shall
deem advisable in such investments as are approved under the laws pertaining to
the investment of sinking or surplus funds of the city, including, but not
limited to, investments in United States savings bonds.
(Ord. 858, passed 4-11-1922; Ord. 2508, passed 7-2-1963)
CHAPTER 3.38: PLANNED LOCAL DRAINAGE FACILITIES FUND
Section
   
3.38.010   Need for facilities
   
3.38.020   Adoption of drainage plan
   
3.38.030   Fund established
   
3.38.040   Drainage fee
   
3.38.050   Disposition of certain funds
   
3.38.060   Reserved
§ 3.38.010 NEED FOR FACILITIES.
   The need for additional drainage facilities throughout the city has been
clearly demonstrated in Comprehensive Storm Drain Plan, Nos. 3, 4, 6 and 7,
prepared for Zones 2 and 3 of the County Flood Control District, copies of
which are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. MC-126, passed 1-7-1982)
§ 3.38.020 ADOPTION OF DRAINAGE PLAN.
   The entire city is designated to be single local drainage area, and
Comprehensive Storm Drain Plan, Nos. 3, 4, 6 and 7 of the County Flood Control
District are adopted as the Drainage Plan for the city.
(Ord. MC-126, passed 1-7-1982)
§ 3.38.030 FUND ESTABLISHED.
   The Planned Local Drainage Facilities Fund is established. The Planned Local
Drainage Facilities Fund is deemed to be the fund provided for in § 66483 of
the State Subdivision Map Act, being Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 66410 et seq. Monies
in said fund shall be expended solely for the design and construction of local
drainage facilities within the city.
(Ord. MC-126, passed 1-7-1982)
§ 3.38.040 DRAINAGE FEE.
   (A)   There is imposed a drainage fee on all land development within the
city. The amount and payment schedule for said fee shall be established by
resolution of the City Council. All drainage fees collected shall be deposited
in the Planned Local Drainage Facilities Fund.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, no drainage fee shall be charged for houses
being relocated from one site to another site within the city as a result of
moving the house from a disaster area where the resolution of the Mayor and
City Council declaring the disaster area specifically references this section
of the code.
   (C)   The fee prescribed in division (A) above shall not be charged for the
construction of any buildings which replace structures on a site previously
developed, except to the extent that the fee for the use established by the new
construction exceeds the fee charged for the use of the structures being
replaced.
   (D)   For the construction of new single-family homes, the fees imposed by
this section may be deferred at the request of the owner of the property until
the release of utilities is issued or 18 months from the issuance of the
building permit, whichever is less. The owner of the property must personally
guarantee payment of the fees, sign documents authorizing the city to place a
lien on the property in the amount of the fees, agree to place the payment of
the fees in any escrow for the sale of the property, authorize the city to
demand payment in any such escrow and pay an administrative fee set by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council. The amount of the fees due shall be
the amount in effect at the time of collection of the fees. In no event shall
utilities be released until the fees are paid, except that electrical service
may be released at the discretion of the Building Official where necessary for
security or maintenance purposes.
(Ord. MC-126, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-155, passed 4-20-1982; Ord. MC-433,
passed 2-5-1985; Ord. MC-1044, passed 4-7-1999; Ord. MC-1045, passed 4-20-1999)
§ 3.38.050 DISPOSITION OF CERTAIN FUNDS.
   All monies in the Planned Local Drainage Facilities Fund not immediately
required for construction purposes shall be invested in a manner provided by
law in the state and all interest paid for such investment shall accrue to said
fund.
(Ord. MC-126, passed 1-7-1982)
§ 3.38.060 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-452, passed 4-15-1985)
CHAPTER 3.40: PROPERTY TAXES
Section
   
3.40.010   Election to use provisions of state statute
   
3.40.020   Request of statement from County Auditor
Statutory reference:
   For provisions pertaining to alternative methods of property tax assessments
and the like, see Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 43093 et seq.
§ 3.40.010 ELECTION TO USE PROVISIONS OF STATE STATUTE.
   The city elects to avail itself of those provisions of the Cal. Gov’t Code,
Title 4, Division 4, Chapter 1, Article 2, §§ 43090 et seq., said provisions
setting forth the alternative method for the levy and collection of city
property taxes wherein and whereby the same are levied and collected by the
county; and, until further order, the assessment of taxable property within the
city, and the levy and collection of taxes for revenue to carry on the various
departments of the city and to pay the bonded and other indebtedness, shall be
assessed, levied and collected as provided in said code and the City Charter.
(Ord. 3904, passed 1-24-1980)
§ 3.40.020 REQUEST OF STATEMENT FROM COUNTY AUDITOR.
   The County Auditor is requested, pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, § 43090, to
transmit to the legislative body of the city a written statement showing the
total value of all property within the city, including the “Old City” as the
city was originally constituted, and all property subsequently annexed thereto,
as described in an ordinance of the city concerning annexation Districts Nos. 1
to 318, inclusive.
(Ord. 3904, passed 1-24-1980)
CHAPTER 3.44: SERVICE USERS TAX
Section
   
3.44.010   Definitions
   
3.44.020   Constitutional exemptions
   
3.44.025   Public schools exemption
   
3.44.030   Reserved
   
3.44.040   Reserved
   
3.44.050   Electricity users tax
   
3.44.060   Gas users tax
   
3.44.065   Application of city users tax
   
3.44.070   Delinquent taxes - penalties
   
3.44.080   Liability of service user - debt of service provider
   
3.44.090   Duty to collect - procedures
   
3.44.100   Additional powers and duties of the Director of Finance and
Management Services
   
3.44.110   Assessment - administrative remedy
   
3.44.120   Records
   
3.44.130   Overpayment, extra payment - refunds
   
3.44.131   Utility users tax rebate program
   
3.44.135   Refunds by service provided
   
3.44.140   Refunds - low income residents of mobile-home parks with master
meters
   
3.44.144   Exemption for household service users - low income
   
3.44.150   Violation - penalty
   
3.44.160   Setting aside increase
   
3.44.170   Review of tax upon service charge increase
§ 3.44.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   PERSON. Includes, but is not limited to, any domestic or foreign
corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnerships of
any kind, joint venture, club, Massachusetts business or common law trust,
society and individuals.
   SERVICE USER. A person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2931, passed 8-13-1968; Ord. MC-837, passed 6-3-1992; Ord. MC-899, passed
3-22-1994)
§ 3.44.020 CONSTITUTIONAL EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person
when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the U.S.
Constitution or that of the state.
(Ord. 2931, passed 8-13-1968)
§ 3.44.025 PUBLIC SCHOOLS EXEMPTION.
   Due to the status of the San Bernardino Unified School District as an agency
established by the City Charter and due to the strong public policy in favor of
encouraging and assisting the provision of public education, public schools are
exempted from the imposition of the service users tax.
(Ord. MC 814, passed 12-3-1991)
§ 3.44.030 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1275, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 3.44.040 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1275, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 3.44.050 ELECTRICITY USERS TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed upon every person in the city using electrical energy
in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 7.75% of
the charges made for such energy and shall be paid by the person paying for
such energy.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term USING ELECTRICAL ENERGY shall not be
construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or
possessed by him or her for use in an automobile or other machinery or device
apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however,
that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of
using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include the mere
receiving of such energy by an electric public utility or governmental agency
at a point within the city for resale; or the use of such energy in a
production or distribution of water by a public utility or governmental agency;
or the use of such energy utility or a governmental agency; or the use of such
energy for the production and distribution of water for lawn and landscape
irrigation of cemeteries.
   (C)   The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service
user by the person supplying such energy. The amount of tax collected in one
month shall be remitted to the Director of Finance and Management Services on
or before the twentieth day of the following month.
(Ord. 2931, passed 8-13-1968; Ord. 3510, passed 6-27-1975; Ord. 3796, passed 1-
9-1979; Ord. MC-297, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. MC-820, passed 2-19-1992; Ord. MC-
939, passed 6-6-1995; Ord. MC-1173, passed 5-5-2004; Ord. MC-1230, passed 9-6-
2006; Ord. MC-1263, passed 2-11-2008; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.44.060 GAS USERS TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed upon every person in the city using gas which is
delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at
the rate of 7.75% of the charges made for such gas and shall be paid by the
person paying for such gas.
   (B)   There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this
section is computed charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered
through mains or pipes; charges made for gas sold for use in the generation of
electrical energy or for the production of water by a public utility or
governmental agency; and charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and
consumed in the conduct of the business of gas public utilities.
   (C)   The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service
user by the person selling the gas. The amount collected in one month shall be
remitted to the Director of Finance and Management Services on or before the
twentieth day of the following month.
(Ord. 2931, passed 8-13-1968; Ord. 3510, passed 6-27-1975; Ord. 3796, passed 1-
9-1979; Ord. MC-297, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. MC-820, passed 2-19-1992; Ord. MC-
939, passed 6-6-1995; Ord. MC-1173, passed 5-5-2004; Ord. MC-1230, passed 9-6-
2006; Ord. MC-1263, passed 2-11-2008; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.44.065 APPLICATION OF CITY USERS TAX.
   The 7.75% users tax imposed on telecommunication services pursuant to
Chapter 3.46, on electrical service pursuant to §
3.44.050, and on gas service pursuant to §
3.44.060 shall be imposed only upon charges made for consumer services. The
7.75% users tax shall not be levied upon any state or federal tax, fee or
surcharge which is separate from the users service charges. This section is
intended to clarify existing law; it does not propose any change in the method
of calculation of the utility users tax.
(Ord. MC-556, passed 11-4-1986; Ord. MC-820, passed 2-19-1992; Ord. MC-939,
passed 6-6-1995; Ord. MC-1173, passed 5-5-2004; Ord. MC-1230, passed 9-6-2006;
Ord. MC-1275, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 3.44.070 DELINQUENT TAXES - PENALTIES.
   (A)   Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the
Director of Finance and Management Services on or before the due dates provided
in this chapter are delinquent.
   (B)   Penalties for delinquency in remittance of any tax collected or any
deficiency determination shall attach and be paid by the person required to
collect and remit at the rate of 15% of the total tax collected or imposed in
this chapter.
   (C)   The Director of Finance and Management Services shall have power to
impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes
under the provisions of this chapter for fraud or negligence in reporting or
remitting at the rate of 15% of the amount of the tax collected or as
recomputed by the Director of Finance and Management Services.
   (D)   Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this section shall
become a part of the tax required to be remitted.
(Ord. 2931, passed 8-13-1968; Ord. 3796, passed 1-9-1979; Ord. MC-1625, passed
2-21-2024)
§ 3.44.080 LIABILITY OF SERVICE USER - DEBT OF SERVICE PROVIDER.
   (A)   Every service user is liable for the taxes imposed by this chapter,
and that liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the city,
except that proof of payment of the tax to the person providing the service is
sufficient to relieve the service user from further liability for the tax to
which the receipt refers.
   (B)   Each service provider shall bill for utility users taxes accrued at
the rate established in this code, coincident with the provider’s own bill for
service provided, all persons, except those specifically exempted from such
tax. Any tax collected by the provider from the service user, together with any
amount uncollected due to the failure or neglect of the service provider to
bill for or attempt to collect the tax, shall constitute a debt owed by the
service provider to the city. If the service user fails or refuses to pay any
such tax, the provider shall not be liable for any billed but uncollected tax.
Each service provider shall provide to the City Director of Finance and
Management Services, at least annually, a list of the names, addresses and
amount of tax billed but unpaid, together with such data as may be required by
the Director of Finance and Management Services to enable him or her to pursue
the matter through court or otherwise. Any amount collected as tax from a
service user which has not been remitted to the Director of Finance and
Management Services is a debt owed to the city by the person or entity required
to collect and remit the tax, unless such amount has been refunded or credited
to the service user.
   (C)   Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for the
recovery of the debt, together with costs, interest and penalties.
(Ord. 2931, passed 8-13-1968; Ord. 3796, passed 1-9-1979; Ord. MC-337, passed
1-25-1984; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.44.090 DUTY TO COLLECT - PROCEDURES.
   The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be
performed as follows.
   (A)   The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as
and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing
practice. If the amount paid by a service user is less than the full amount of
the charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, a proportionate
share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid.
   (B)   The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the
beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to that person which
starts on or after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for
different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for
each billing period.
(Ord. 2931, passed 8-13-1968)
§ 3.44.100 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF FINANCE AND
MANAGEMENT SERVICES.
   The Director of Finance and Management Services shall have the power and
duty and is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2931, passed 8-13-1968; Ord. 3796, passed 1-9-1979; Ord. MC-1625, passed
2-21-2024)
§ 3.44.110 ASSESSMENT - ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY.
   (A)   The Director of Finance and Management Services may make an assessment
for taxes not paid or remitted by a person required to pay or remit. The
Director of Finance and Management Services shall prepare a notice of the
assessment which shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes and penalties
imposed and the time and place when such assessment shall be submitted to the
Mayor and City Council for confirmation or modification. The City Clerk shall
mail a copy of such notice to the person selling the service and to the service
user at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing and shall post such
notice for at least five continuous days prior to the date of the hearing on
the chamber door of the Mayor and City Council. Any interested party having any
objections may appear and be heard at the hearing; provided his or her
objection is filed in writing with the City Clerk prior to the time set for the
hearing. At the time fixed for considering the assessment, the Mayor and City
Council shall hear the same, together with any objection filed as aforesaid and
thereupon may confirm or modify the assessment by motion.
   (B)   Whenever the Director of Finance and Management Services determines
that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him
or her from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or
that a service user has failed to pay the amount of the tax to such person for
a period of two or more billing periods, or whenever the Director of Finance
and Management Services deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she
may relieve such person of the obligation to collect taxes due under this
chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods. The
Director of Finance and Management Services shall notify the service user that
he or she has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated
periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the
service user by handing it to him or her personally or by deposit of the notice
in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service
user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect
the tax; or, should the service user have changed his or her address, to his or
her last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the
Director of Finance and Management Services within 15 days from the date of the
service of the notice upon him or her, which shall be the date of mailing if
service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of 25% of the amount of the
tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed but not less than $5. The penalty
shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid.
(Ord. 2931, passed 8-13-1968; Ord. 3796, passed 1-9-1979; Ord. MC-1625, passed
2-21-2024)
§ 3.44.120 RECORDS.
   It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the
city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of
three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such
tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to
the Director of Finance and Management Services, which records the Director of
Finance and Management Services shall have the right to inspect at all
reasonable times.
(Ord. 2931, passed 8-13-1968; Ord. 3796, passed 1-9-1979; Ord. MC-1625, passed
2-21-2024)
§ 3.44.130 OVERPAYMENT, EXTRA PAYMENT - REFUNDS.
   (A)   Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than
once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Director
of Finance and Management Services under this chapter, it may be refunded as
provided in this section.
   (B)   A person required to collect and remit taxes imposed under this
chapter may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and
remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally
collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the
Director of Finance and Management Services that the service user from whom the
tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a
refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected
has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges
subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect and
remit.
   (C)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless
the claimant has submitted a written claim to the Director of Finance and
Management Services within one year of the overpayment of erroneous or illegal
collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to
the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. The submission of a
written claim, which is acted upon by the City Council, shall be a prerequisite
to a suit thereon. (See Cal. Gov’t Code, § 935.) The Mayor and City Council
shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set forth in Cal. Gov’t
Code, § 912.4; the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected on the last day
of the period within which the Mayor and City Council was required to act upon
the claim as provided in Cal. Gov’t Code, § 912.4. It is the intent of the
Mayor and City Council that the requirement of this division (C) to file a
written claim within one year of the overpayment of erroneous or illegal
collection of said tax be given retroactive effect to all claims that arose
under this Chapter 3.44 at any time period to the effective date of the
ordinance incorporated in this chapter; provided, however, that any claims
which arose prior to the commencement of the one-year claims period of this
division (C), and which are not otherwise barred by a then applicable statute
of limitations or claims procedure, must be filed with the Director of Finance
and Management Services as provided in this division (C) within 90 days
following the effective date of the ordinance incorporated in this chapter.
(Ord. 2931, passed 8-13-1968; Ord. 3796, passed 1-9-1979; Ord. MC-899, passed
3-22-1994; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.44.131 UTILITY USERS TAX REBATE PROGRAM.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, in order to
attract new businesses that provide significant numbers of higher-wage jobs,
the following utility users tax rebate program is established.
      (1)   Any new business that creates, after January 1, 2000, between five
to 49 new, permanent, full-time jobs within the city (50% of such new jobs
shall pay at least $25,000 per year in wages and/or commissions, except that
the dollar requirement for said jobs shall not apply to manufacturing and
distribution businesses) shall be eligible for a rebate on the amount of
utility users tax, paid by such business on electrical, gas, video and
telephone communication services, imposed by this chapter according to the
following schedule:
         (a)   First year: 75% rebate;
         (b)   Second year: 50% rebate;
         (c)   Third year: 25% rebate; and
         (d)   Fourth and subsequent years: no rebate.
      (2)   Any new business that creates, after January 1, 2000, 50 or more
new, permanent, full-time jobs within the city (50% of such new jobs shall pay
at least $25,000 per year in wages and/or commissions, except that the dollar
requirement for said jobs shall not apply to manufacturing and distribution
businesses) shall be eligible for a rebate on the amount of utility users tax,
paid by such business on electrical, gas, video and telephone communication
services, imposed by this chapter according to the following schedule:
         (a)   First year: 80% rebate;
         (b)   Second year: 60% rebate;
         (c)   Third year: 40% rebate; and
         (d)   Fourth and subsequent years: no rebate.
      (3)   Any new business not included under divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2)
above, which provides, after January 1, 2000, at least a 25% increase in
assessed valuation of the business’ real property over the previous tax year as
shown by the County Tax Assessor’s records, or which generates at least $40,000
in sales tax revenues per year remitted to the city, shall be eligible for a
rebate on the amount of utility users tax, paid by such business on electrical,
gas, video and telephone communication services, imposed by this chapter
according to the following schedule:
         (a)   First year: 75% rebate;
         (b)   Second year: 50% rebate;
         (c)   Third year: 25% rebate; and
         (d)   Fourth and subsequent years: no rebate.
      (4)   A new business qualified under divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above
shall also be eligible for an additional rebate of 1% on the amount of utility
users tax paid, for each city resident that is hired to fill the new,
permanent, full-time jobs created within the city. Eligibility for any such
additional rebates shall be established by determining the residency of the new
employees at the end of each year of rebate eligibility. This determination
shall be verified by the Economic Development Agency with such supporting
documentation as may be required by the Economic Development Agency. In no case
shall the total rebate paid to any claimant exceed the total amount of utility
users tax paid on the period claimed, nor rebates be paid for any term other
than the schedule established in divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above.
      (5)   To claim a rebate under this section, the claimant shall submit a
completed verified claim form to the Economic Development Agency with such
supporting documentation as may be required by the Economic Development Agency
to determine claimant’s eligibility and to establish the amount of utility
users tax paid by claimant on the period claimed, and the commencement date of
the “first year,” as that term is used herein. A claim for a rebate shall be
submitted annually to the Economic Development Agency not later than three
months after the close of the year for which such refund is sought. The
verified claim must be signed by an authorized officer of the claimant. The
rebate shall be paid at the recommendation of the Economic Development Agency
and subject to approval of the Department of Finance and Management Services.
      (6)   No rebates shall be paid if the subject business is no longer in
operation in the city.
      (7)   FIRST YEAR, as used in this section, shall mean, for a new
business, the 12-month period immediately following the date of commencement of
business at the location for which a claim for rebate is filed.
   (B)   Not withstanding any other provision of this chapter, in order to
encourage the physical expansion and/or creation of significant numbers of
higher-wage jobs by existing city businesses, the following utility users tax
rebate program is established to complement the program recently adopted for
new businesses.
      (1)   Any business currently operating in the city shall be eligible for
a utility users tax rebate if, after January 1, 2000, it meets the criteria of
at least two of the categories below:
         (a)   Category A: Expansion Criteria:
            1.   The business expands by completing a permitted expansion at
its current location, resulting in an increase of at least 25% of the current
construction valuation of the existing building; or
            2.   The business relocates within the city, and the relocation is
to a facility with at least 25% more square feet than the previous location.
         (b)   Category B: Job Criteria: the business creates and maintains at
least five new, permanent, full-time jobs (50% of such new jobs shall pay at
least $25,000 per year in wages and/or commissions, except that the dollar
requirement for said jobs shall not apply to manufacturing and distribution
businesses) in addition to the jobs already existing at the current location(s)
within the city, and sustains that job increase over the previous 12 month
period prior to the application for the rebate.
         (c)   Category C: Sales Tax Criteria: the business generates at least
$10,000 more in sales or use tax revenues to the city than was generated in the
previous 12-month period prior to application for the rebate.
         (d)   If qualified under this section, the business shall be eligible
for a rebate on the amount of paid utility users tax paid by such business on
electrical, gas, video and telephone communication services, imposed by this
chapter according to the following schedule:
            1.   First year: 75% rebate;
            2.   Second year: 50% rebate;
            3.   Third year: 25% rebate; and
            4.   Fourth and subsequent years: no rebate.
         (e)   In no case shall any qualified business receive a rebate that
exceeds the amount of additional sales or use tax revenues received by the city
during the previous 12-month period prior to application for the rebate.
Additionally, if the business is receiving assistance from the Economic
Development Agency under an owner participation agreement (“OPA”) or
disposition and development agreement (“DDA”), and the combined annual value of
Agency assistance provided together with proposed utility tax rebate exceeds
the amount of additional annual sales tax revenue to the city, then the
business shall not be eligible for the rebate.
      (2)   Any business currently operating in the city, and not qualified
under division (B)(1) above or division (B)(3) below, shall be eligible for a
utility users tax rebate if it creates, after January 1, 2000 and maintains at
least 50 new, permanent, full-time jobs (50% of such new jobs shall pay at
least $25,000 per year in wages and/or commissions, except that the dollar
requirement for said jobs shall not apply to manufacturing and distribution
businesses) in addition to the jobs already existing at the current location(s)
within the city, and sustains that job increase over the previous 12-month
period prior to application for the rebate. If qualified, the business shall be
eligible for a rebate of utility users tax paid on the following scale:
         (a)   First year: 75% rebate;
         (b)   Second year: 50% rebate;
         (c)   Third year: 25% rebate; and
         (d)   Fourth and subsequent years: no rebate.
      (3)   Any business currently operating in the city shall be eligible for
a utility users tax rebate if, after January 1, 2000, it adds a new additional
location within the city, and continues to operate the previously existing
location or locations within the city for the previous 12-month period prior to
application for the rebate. For purposes of this program, the additional
location shall be considered “new business” and shall be eligible for rebates
in accordance with the program already established for new businesses (division
(A) above).
      (4)   Any business currently operating in the city and qualified under
divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) above shall also be eligible for an additional
rebate of 1% on the amount of utility users tax paid for each city resident
that is hired to fill the new, permanent full-time jobs created within the city
that meet the wage criteria. Eligibility for any such additional rebates shall
be established by determining the residency of the new employees at the end of
each year of rebate eligibility. This determination shall be verified by the
Economic Development Agency with such supporting documentation as may be
required by the Economic Development Agency. In no case shall the total rebate
paid to any claimant exceed the total amount of utility users tax paid for the
period claimed, nor shall rebates be paid for any term other than the schedule
established by this section.
      (5)   To claim a rebate under this section, the claimant shall submit a
completed verified claim form to the Economic Development Agency with such
supporting documentation as may be required by the Economic Development Agency
to determine claimant’s eligibility and to establish the amount of utility
users tax paid by claimant on the period claimed, and the commencement date of
the “first year,” as that term is used herein. A claim for a rebate shall be
submitted annually to the Economic Development Agency not later than three
months after the close of the year for which such refund is sought. The
verified claim must be signed by an authorized officer of the claimant. The
rebate shall be paid at the recommendation of the Economic Development Agency
and subject to approval of the Department of Finance and Management Services.
      (6)   No rebates shall be paid if the subject business is no longer in
operation in the city.
      (7)   FIRST YEAR, as used in this section, shall mean, for an existing
business, the 12-month period immediately proceeding following the date the
claim for rebate is filed.
(Ord. MC-1065, passed 3-7-2000; Ord. MC-1078, passed 8-8-2000; Ord. MC-1117,
passed 3-5-2002; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.44.135 REFUNDS BY SERVICE PROVIDED.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, whenever a
service supplier, pursuant to an order of the State Public Utilities Commission
or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of
charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on
the amount of such refund charges shall also be refunded to service users, and
the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded
taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. In
the event this chapter is repealed prior to the time that the service supplier
has received credit for such refunded taxes, then the city shall pay the amount
of refunded taxes due.
   (B)   Prior to making any refund pursuant to division (A) above, the service
supplier shall provide, in the time and manner prescribed by the City
Administrator, a copy of the order of the State Public Utilities Commission (or
judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction) mandating the refund and any
other relevant material or information.
(Ord. MC-510, passed 4-22-1986)
§ 3.44.140 REFUNDS - LOW INCOME RESIDENTS OF MOBILE-HOME PARKS WITH MASTER
METERS.
   (A)   A refund of all taxes due and paid under the provisions of this
chapter for utility services rendered on and after January 1, 1984 to residents
of mobile-home parks whose utility services were charged through a master meter
shall be made whenever all of the following occur:
      (1)   The annual gross income of the household in which one person lives
is less than an amount set by the Mayor and City Council by resolution;
      (2)   The annual gross income of the household in which a married couple
or family lives is less than an amount set by the Mayor and City Council by
resolution;
      (3)   The claimant makes application and files a verified claim in
writing with the Director of Finance and Management Services at City Hall for
such refund upon a claim form provided by said Director; and/or
      (4)   The claim is approved by said Director as being in conformance with
this division (A). Only one member of each household may file a claim and only
one claim may be filed for each individual household.
   (B)   The claimant shall be the person in whose name the bills for utilities
service were rendered. INCOME OF THE HOUSEHOLD means an income of the
claimant’s household from all members living in such household who are related
to the claimant as a spouse or as defined in the Cal. Revenue and Taxation
Code, §§ 17056 and 17057.
   (C)   GROSS INCOME means the sum of adjusted gross income as used for
purposes of the State Personal Income Tax Law, together with the net income
from all sources of all kinds, including, but not limited to, alimony, support
money, cash public assistance and relief, pensions, annuities, social security,
interest on securities (including tax free interest on governmental
securities), realized capital gains, workers’ compensation (not including
medical benefits), unemployment insurance income, insurance benefits of all
kinds (other than medical) and gifts, except that income shall not include
Medicare benefits, MediCal benefits, gifts of food and gifts between members of
the household, the receipt of surplus food or other relief in kind supplied by
a governmental agency.
   (D)   The claim for such refund for the preceding 12-month period may be
made at any time during the year, and must be accompanied by proof that the
utility taxes have been paid by the claimant or some member of the household.
   (E)   No refund shall be made to any person for taxes levied on a utility
account for which any utility tax is due and outstanding for the period for
which refund is claimed or for any prior period. No refund shall be made for
any tax which was paid with public assistance or relief funds which included an
allowance to pay the tax.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any utility
company has any obligation to make or furnish, for the purpose of the refund
provisions hereof, proof of utility taxes due or utility taxes paid.
(Ord. 2931, passed 8-13-1968; Ord. 3505, passed 6-17-1975; Ord. 3861, passed 9-
12-1979; Ord. MC-297, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. MC-330, passed 12-20-1983; Ord. MC-
515, passed 4-22-1986; Ord. MC-712, passed 3-19-1990; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-
21-2024)
§ 3.44.144 EXEMPTION FOR HOUSEHOLD SERVICE USERS - LOW INCOME.
   (A)   Effective January 1, 1984, the tax imposed by this chapter shall not
apply to any individual who uses telephone, electric, gas or cable television
services in or upon any premises occupied by such individual provided that the
following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The annual gross income of the household in which one person lives
is less than an amount set by the Mayor and City Council by resolution;
      (2)   The annual gross income of the household in which a married couple
or family lives is less than an amount set by the Mayor and City Council by
resolution; and/or
      (3)   The conditions of §
3.44.140(A)(3), (A)(4), (B), (C) and (F) are satisfied, with the word
“claimant” therein referring to the individual applying for exemption.
   (B)   Any person claiming exemption pursuant to this section may file a
claim for such exemption at any time in order to qualify for an exemption for
the subsequent 12-month period, or until a current exemption is scheduled to
expire.
      (1)   Between October 31, 1985 and the effective date of this division
(B), applications for renewal of exemptions may be made to the Director of
Finance and Management Services, without prejudice, by persons whose exemptions
were scheduled to expire on December 31, 1985. Exemptions granted under this
provision shall not be retroactive.
      (2)   An application for exemption or renewal shall be made upon forms
supplied by the Director of Finance and Management Services and shall declare
facts under penalty of perjury which qualify the applicant for the exemption.
   (C)   The Director of Finance and Management Services, or his or her
designee, shall review all applications for exemption or renewal, certify as
exempt those applicants who qualify and notify all service suppliers affected
that such exemptions have been approved, stating the name of the exempt
applicant, the account number shown on the utility bill, the address to which
exempt service is being supplied and any other information necessary for the
service supplier to remove the exempt service user from its tax billing
procedure. Upon receipt of notice from the Director of Finance and Management
Services, the service supplier shall not be required to collect any further tax
imposed by this chapter from such exempt service user until further notice from
the Director of Finance and Management Services. Prior to the expiration date
of each exemption, the Director of Finance and Management Services shall send
notice, by ordinary mail, reminding the holder of the expiration date. At the
same time, the Director of Finance and Management Services may also send a
renewal application which may be returned by ordinary mail. These reminders
shall be sent within such reasonable time as to allow processing of the renewal
with no lapse in the exemption status.
   (D)   Each exemption shall expire 12 months after the date it was issued, or
December 31, 1986, whichever date is later. The Director of Finance and
Management Services shall notify each service supplier to resume collection of
utility taxes on the accounts of those service users who have not applied for
renewal of their exempt status or whose applications for renewal have been
denied. Upon receipt of the written notification, these service suppliers shall
resume such collection on those accounts affected commencing with the first
billing period beginning after the exemption expires. Notwithstanding any of
the provisions of this section, any service supplier who determines, during any
calendar year, by any means readily available to it, that a non-exempt service
user is receiving services through a meter or connection exempt by virtue of an
exemption issued to a previous user of the same meter or connection, the
service supplier shall forthwith resume the collection of taxes imposed by this
chapter upon the non-exempt service user.
   (E)   Any individual who has been exempted from the tax shall notify the
Director of Finance and Management Services within ten days of any change of
address or any other change in fact or circumstance which might disqualify that
individual from receiving the exemption. If it is determined by the Director of
Finance and Management Services that the individual is no longer qualified, the
Director of Finance and Management Services shall give notice to the service
supplier who shall resume collection of the tax imposed by this chapter
commencing with the next billing period. If the user is entitled to exemption
at a new address, the Director of Finance and Management Services shall notify
affected service suppliers of that fact.
   (F)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly receive the
benefits of the exemptions provided by this section when the basis for the
exemption either does not exist or ceases to exist. The Director of Finance and
Management Services may, from time to time, or at any time, demand evidence of
continued eligibility of a service user for exemption under the provisions of
this section. Such evidence may include, without limit, copies of business
records, letters or statements from the Social Security Administration; copies
of income tax returns; and other evidence concerning the service user or
members of his or her household which may tend to prove or disprove
eligibility. Failure to provide sufficient evidence to establish eligibility
when requested by the Director of Finance and Management Services shall be
grounds for denial or discontinuance of the service users’ exemption, but
evidence voluntarily provided to the Director of Finance and Management
Services may only be used as grounds for termination of the exemption and not
as evidence of violation of the provisions of this section. If the Director of
Finance and Management Services determines that an application for exemption is
faulty or untruthful, the application shall be denied in writing and the
applicant may file an amended application or appeal the decision of the
Director of Finance and Management Services to the City Administrator, whose
decision shall be final.
   (G)   No individual shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter
except in accordance with this section. The provisions of this section shall
not apply retroactively, and no refund shall be made for any taxes paid prior
to the issuance and effective date of an exemption granted by the Director of
Finance and Management Services, nor shall any refund be made for any taxes
collected during any period in which an exemption from the Director of Finance
and Management Services was not in effect or had lapsed by failure to apply for
renewal.
(Ord. MC-297, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. MC-515, passed 4-22-1986; Ord. MC-712,
passed 3-19-1990; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.44.150 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 2931, passed 8-13-1968; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 3.44.160 SETTING ASIDE INCREASE.
   In the event the beginning undesignated fund balance for the city’s General
Fund in the 1984 to 1985 preliminary or final budget as in effect on July 1,
1984 is more than 5% of the proposed expenditures and obligations of the
General Fund for that budget, as determined by a written declaration filed by
the Director of Finance and Management Services with the City Clerk, the tax
imposed in this chapter shall be reduced to 6% for all services effective upon
the first billings after July 1, 1984.
(Ord. MC-297, passed 8-4-1983; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.44.170 REVIEW OF TAX UPON SERVICE CHARGE INCREASE.
   Whenever the charge for any service upon which a tax is imposed by this
chapter is increased, the Mayor and City Council shall review the increased
charge and determine whether or not the service users tax shall be modified.
(Ord. MC-331, passed 1-10-1984)
CHAPTER 3.46: SERVICE USERS TAX REDUCTION AND MODERNIZATION ACT
Section
   
3.46.010   Short title
   
3.46.020   Definitions
   
3.46.030   Constitutional, statutory and other exemptions
   
3.46.040   Communication users tax
   
3.46.050   Bundling taxable items with non-taxable items
   
3.46.060   Substantial nexus/minimum contacts
   
3.46.070   Duty to collect - procedures
   
3.46.080   Collection penalties - service suppliers
   
3.46.090   Actions to collect
   
3.46.100   Deficiency determination and assessment - tax application errors
   
3.46.110   Administrative remedy - non-paying service users
   
3.46.120   Additional powers and duties of the Tax Administrator
   
3.46.130   Records
   
3.46.140   Refunds
   
3.46.150   Appeals
   
3.46.160   No injunction/writ of mandate
   
3.46.170   Notice of changes to ordinance
   
3.46.180   Future amendment to cited statute
   
3.46.190   Independent audit of tax collection, exemption, remittance and
expenditure
   
3.46.200   No increase in tax percentage or change in methodology without voter
approval
   
3.46.210   Remedies cumulative
   
3.46.220   Interaction with prior tax
   
3.46.230   Violation - penalty
§ 3.46.010 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Service Users Tax Reduction and
Modernization Act” of the city.
§ 3.46.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANCILLARY TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES. Services that are associated with or
incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications services,
including, but not limited to, the following services.
      (1)   CONFERENCE BRIDGING SERVICE. An ancillary service that links two or
more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the
provision of a telephone number. CONFERENCE BRIDGING SERVICE does not include
the telecommunications services used to reach the conference bridge.
      (2)   DETAILED TELECOMMUN- ICATIONS BILLING SERVICE. An ancillary service
of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a
customer’s billing statement.
      (3)   DIRECTORY ASSISTANCE. An ancillary service of providing telephone
number information and/or address information.
      (4)   VERTICAL SERVICE. An ancillary service that is offered in
connection with one or more telecommunications services, which offers advanced
calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage
multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services.
      (5)   VOICE MAIL SERVICE. An ancillary service that enables the customer
to store, send or receive recorded messages. VOICE MAIL SERVICE does not
include any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in
order to utilize the VOICE MAIL SERVICE.
   ANCILLARY VIDEO SERVICES. Services that are associated with or incidental to
the provision or delivery of video services, including, but not limited to,
electronic program guide services, search functions or other interactive
services or communications that are associated with or incidental to the
provision, use or enjoyment of video programming.
   BILLING ADDRESS. The mailing address of the service user where the service
supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino.
   COMMUNICATION SERVICES. “Telecommunication services,” “ancillary
telecommunication services,” “video services” and “ancillary video services.”
   MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Has the same meaning and usage as set
forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. § 124) and the
regulations thereunder, as the same exists or may be amended from time to time.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   PAGING SERVICE. A “telecommunications service” that provides transmission of
coded radio signals for the purpose of activating specific pagers; such
transmissions may include messages and/or sounds.
   PERSON. Without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law
trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint
stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including
foreign, domestic and non-profit), municipal district or municipal corporation,
cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by
order of any court.
   PLACE OF PRIMARY USE. The street address representative of where the
customer’s use of the communications service primarily occurs, which must be
the residential street address or the primary business street address of the
customer.
   POST-PAID TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE. The telecommunication service obtained
by making a payment on a communication- by-communication basis either through
the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card,
credit card or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not
associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication
service.
   PREPAID TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE. The right to access telecommunication
services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination
of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether
manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined units or
dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount.
   PRIVATE TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE. A telecommunication service that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in
which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity,
extension lines, stations and any other associated services that are provided
in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A COMMUNICATIONS
CHANNEL is a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are
transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e., the
location where the customer either inputs or receives the communications).
   SERVICE ADDRESS.
      (1)   Either:
         (a)   The location of the service user’s communication equipment from
which the communication originates or terminates, regardless of where the
communication is billed or paid; or
         (b)   If the location in division (1) of this definition is unknown
(e.g., mobile telecommunications service or VoIP service), the SERVICE ADDRESS
means the location of the service user’s place of primary use.
      (2)   For prepaid telecommunication service, SERVICE ADDRESS means the
location associated with the service number.
   SERVICE SUPPLIER. Any entity or person, including the city, that provides
communication service to a user of such service within the city.
   SERVICE USER. A person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of
this chapter.
   SERVICE USERS TAX. The tax imposed by this chapter.
   STATE. The State of California.
   STREAMLINED SALES AND USE TAX AGREEMENT. The multi-state agreement commonly
known and referred to as the streamlined sales and use tax agreement, and as it
is amended from time to time.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Director of Finance and Management Services of the
City of San Bernardino, or his or her designee.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. The transmission, conveyance or routing of
voice, data, audio, video or any other information or signals to a point, or
between or among points, whatever the technology used. The term TELECOMM-
UNICATIONS SERVICES includes such transmission, conveyance or routing in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol
of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without
regard to whether such services are referred to as voice over internet protocol
(“VoIP”) services or are classified by the Federal Communications Commission as
enhanced or value added, and includes video and/or data services that is
functionally integrated with TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SERVICES include, but are not limited to, the following services, regardless of
the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: ancillary
telecommunication services; mobile telecommunications service; prepaid
telecommunication service (to the extent that it is practicable for the service
supplier to collect the correct tax imposed under this chapter from the service
supplier); post-paid telecommunication service; private telecommunication
service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated
by the Federal Communications Commission); and 900 service (or any other
similar numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission for
services whereby subscribers who call in to pre-recorded or live service).
   VIDEO PROGRAMMING. Those programming services commonly provided to
subscribers by a “video service supplier,” including, but not limited to, basic
services, premium services, audio services, video games, pay-per-view services,
video on demand, origination programming or any other similar services,
regardless of the content of such VIDEO PROGRAMMING, or the technology used to
deliver such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such
services are calculated or billed.
   VIDEO SERVICES. Any and all services related to the providing, storing or
delivering of “video programming” (including origination programming and
programming using Internet Protocol, e.g., IP-TV and IP-Video) using one or
more channels by a “video service supplier,” regardless of the technology used
to deliver, store or provide such services, and regardless of the manner or
basis on which such services are calculated or billed, and includes data
services, “telecommunication services” or interactive communication services
that are functionally integrated with VIDEO SERVICES.
   VIDEO SERVICE SUPPLIER. Any person, company or service which provides or
sells one or more channels of video programming, or provides or sells the
capability to receive one or more channels of video programming, including any
communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the provision, use or
enjoyment of the video programming, to or from a business or residential
address in the city, where some fee is paid, whether directly or included in
dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way
are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or communications. A
VIDEO SERVICE SUPPLIER includes, but is not limited to, multi-channel video
programming distributors (as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(13)); open video
systems (“OVS”) suppliers; and suppliers of cable television; master antenna
television; satellite master antenna television; multi-channel multi-point
distribution services (“MMDS”); video services using internet protocol (e.g.,
IP-TV and IP-Video, which provide, among other things, broadcasting and video
on demand); direct broadcast satellite to the extent federal law permits
taxation of its video services, now or in the future; and other suppliers of
video programming or communications (including two-way communications),
whatever their technology.
   VoIP (VOICE OVER INTERNET PROTOCOL). The digital process of making and
receiving real-time voice transmissions over any Internet Protocol network.
   800 SERVICE. A “telecommunications service” that allows a caller to dial a
toll-free number without incurring a charge for the call. The service is
typically marketed under the name “800,” “855,” “866,” “877” and “888” toll-
free calling, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal
Communications Commission.
   900 SERVICE. An inbound toll “telecommunications service” purchased by a
subscriber that allows the subscriber’s customers to call in to the
subscriber’s prerecorded announcement or live service. 900 SERVICE does not
include the charge for: collection services provided by the seller of the
“telecommunications services” to the subscriber, or service or product sold by
the subscriber to the subscriber’s customer. The service is typically marketed
under the name 900 SERVICE, and any subsequent numbers designated by the
Federal Communications Commission.
(Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.46.030 CONSTITUTIONAL, STATUTORY AND OTHER EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any
person or service when the imposition of such tax upon such person or service
would be in violation of a federal or state statute, the U.S. Constitution or
the California Constitution.
   (B)   Due to the status of the San Bernardino City Unified School District
as an agency established by the City Charter and due to the strong public
policy in favor of encouraging and assisting the provision of public education,
public schools are exempted from the imposition of the communications users
tax.
   (C)   Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter
pursuant to division (A) above shall file an application with the Tax
Administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not
apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a
commonly recognized name for such service. Said application shall be made upon
a form approved by the Tax Administrator and shall state those facts, declared
under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and
shall include the names of all communication service suppliers serving that
service user. If deemed exempt by the Tax Administrator, such service user
shall give the Tax Administrator timely written notice of any change in utility
service suppliers so that the Tax Administrator can properly notify the new
communication service supplier of the service users tax exempt status. A
service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a
refund of such taxes collected and remitted to the Tax Administrator from such
service user as a result of such non-compliance. Upon request of the Tax
Administrator, a service supplier or its billing agent shall provide a list of
the names and addresses of those customers which, according to its billing
records, are deemed exempt from the communication users tax. The decision of
the Tax Administrator may be appealed by filing an application with the Tax
Administrator and appeal to the City Manager. The City Manager shall give
notice of and conduct an informed hearing and shall render a decision in
writing. Such hearing is a prerequisite to a suit herein.
   (D)   The exemption and rebate provisions of §§
3.44.140 and
3.44.144 shall apply to this chapter.
§ 3.46.040 COMMUNICATION USERS TAX.
   (A)   There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using
communication services. The maximum tax imposed by this section shall be at the
rate of 7.75% of the charges made for such services and shall be collected from
the service user by the communication services supplier or its billing agent.
There is a rebuttable presumption that communication services, which are billed
to a billing or service address in the city, are used, in whole or in part,
within the boundaries of the city, and such services are subject to taxation
under this chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different
from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used
for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term CHARGES
shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind
or nature or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for
the communication services.
   (B)   “Mobile telecommunications service” shall be sourced in accordance
with the sourcing rules set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act
(4 U.S.C. §§ 116 et seq.), as the same exists or may be amended from time to
time. The Tax Administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service
suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this
chapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of other communication services,
including, but not limited to, post-paid communication services, prepaid
communication services and private communication services; provided that such
rules are based upon custom and common practice that further administrative
efficiency and minimize multi-jurisdictional taxation (e.g., streamlined sales
and use tax agreement).
   (C)   The Tax Administrator may issue and disseminate to communication
service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this
chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those communication services, or
charges therefor, that are subject to or not subject to the tax of division (A)
above.
   (D)   As used in this section, the term TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES shall
include, but is not limited to, charges for: connection, reconnection,
termination, movement or change of telecommunication services; late payment
fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including,
but not limited to, call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and
three-way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory
assistance; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory,
administrative and other cost recovery charges; local number portability
charges; and text and instant messaging. TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES shall not
include digital downloads that are not “ancillary telecommunications services,”
such as books, music, ringtones, games and similar digital products.
   (E)   Charges for communication services (video) shall include, but are not
limited to, charges for the following:
      (1)   Regulatory fees and surcharges, franchise fees and access fees
(“PEG”);
      (2)   Franchise fees;
      (3)   Initial installation of equipment necessary for provision and
receipt of communication services;
      (4)   Late fees, collection fees, bad debt recoveries and returned check
fees;
      (5)   Activation fees, reactivation fees and reconnection fees;
      (6)   All video programming services (e.g., basic services, premium
services, audio services, video games, pay-per-view services or on-demand
programming);
      (7)   Ancillary programming services (e.g., electronic program guide
services, search functions or other interactive services or communications that
are ancillary, necessary or common to the use or enjoyment of the video
programming);
      (8)   Equipment leases (e.g., converters, remote devices); and
      (9)   Service calls, service protection plans, name changes, changes of
services and special services.
   (F)   To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of communication
services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the
Tax Administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in
another state or local jurisdiction on such communication services, shall be
allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such
tax legally imposed in such other state or local jurisdiction; provided,
however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under
this section.
   (G)   The tax on communication services imposed by this section shall be
collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of tax
collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be
received by the Tax Administrator on or before the twentieth day of the
following month.
§ 3.46.050 BUNDLING TAXABLE ITEMS WITH NON-TAXABLE ITEMS.
   Except as otherwise provided by applicable federal or state law, if any non-
taxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from taxable
service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the
combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies, by
reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that
are non-taxable and taxable through the service supplier’s books and records
kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax
purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper
apportionment of taxable and non-taxable charges. If the service supplier
offers a combination of services that include taxable and non-taxable services
or products, and the charges are separately stated, then for taxation purposes,
the values assigned the taxable and non-taxable services or products shall be
based on its books and records kept in the regular course of business and in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and
maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the
proper valuation and apportionment of taxable and non-taxable charges.
§ 3.46.060 SUBSTANTIAL NEXUS/MINIMUM CONTACTS.
   For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a
tax under this chapter, “substantial nexus” and “minimum contacts” shall be
construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of
the service users tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law,
and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by
statutory enactment. Any communication service (including VoIP) used by a
person with a service address in the city, which service is capable of
terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, shall be
subject to a rebuttable presumption that “substantial nexus/minimum contacts”
exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and
remit a tax, under this chapter. A service supplier shall be deemed to have
sufficient activity in the city for tax collection and remittance purposes if
its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains
or has within the city, directly or through an agent or subsidiary, a place of
business of any nature; solicits business in the city by employees, independent
contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in
the city on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of
advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter within the city or
distributed from a location within the city; or advertises in newspapers or
other periodicals printed and published within the city or through materials
distributed in the city by means other than the United States mail.
§ 3.46.070 DUTY TO COLLECT - PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Collection by service suppliers. The duty of service suppliers to
collect and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be
performed as follows.
      (1)   The tax shall be collected by service suppliers insofar as
practicable at the same time as, and along with, the collection of the charges
made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier.
Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the
full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a
proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been
paid. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of
refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges, §
3.46.090 shall apply.
      (2)   The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service
user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period
applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such
regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a service
user receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods
than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing
period.
   (B)   Filing return and payment. Each person required by this chapter to
remit a tax shall file a return to the Tax Administrator, on forms approved by
the Tax Administrator, on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax
collected shall be included with the return and filed with the Tax
Administrator. The Tax Administrator is authorized to require such additional
information as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being
levied, collected and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are due
immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Cal. Revenue
and Taxation Code, § 7284.6, the Tax Administrator, and its agents, shall
maintain such filing returns as confidential information that is exempt from
the disclosure provisions of the State Public Records Act (Cal. Gov’t Code, §§
6500 et seq.).
Editor’s note:
   Taxpayer information received in connection with collection of local taxes
may be exempt from PRA under Cal. Gov’t Code, §7925.000 (2023) (formerly Cal.
Gov’t Code, § 6254(i)); I.R.C. § 6103.
§ 3.46.080 COLLECTION PENALTIES - SERVICE SUPPLIERS.
   (A)   Taxes collected from a service user are delinquent if not received by
the Tax Administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a
weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the Tax Administrator
on the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A
direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods
of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a
service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this division (A)
shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due
date, and the transfer settles into the city’s account on the following
business day.
   (B)   If the person required to collect and/or remit the service users tax
fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more
services or charges on the customer’s billing) or fails to remit the tax
collected on or before the due date, the Tax Administrator shall attach a
penalty for such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of 15% of the total
tax that is delinquent or deficient in the remittance, and shall pay interest
at the rate of and 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of
the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first
became delinquent, until paid.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power to impose additional
penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or
remitting at the rate of 15% of the amount of the tax collected and/or required
to be remitted, or as recomputed by the Tax Administrator.
   (D)   For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest
that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the
tax herein required to be paid.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Tax Administrator may, in his or
her discretion, modify the due dates of this chapter to be consistent with any
uniform standards or procedures that are mutually agreed upon by other public
agencies imposing a service users tax, or otherwise legally established, to
create a central payment location or mechanism.
§ 3.46.090 ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
   Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such
tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the Tax
Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to
collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person
owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in
an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount,
including penalties and interest as provided for in this chapter, along with
any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the person’s non-
compliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable
attorneys’ fees. Any tax required to be collected by a service supplier or owed
by a service user is an unsecured priority excise tax obligation pursuant to 11
U.S.C. § 507(a)(8)(C).
§ 3.46.100 DEFICIENCY DETERMINATION AND ASSESSMENT - TAX APPLICATION ERRORS.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or
she determines that any service supplier or service user required to pay,
collect and/or remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has
failed to pay, collect and/or remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or
failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable services or charges. Nothing
herein shall require that the Tax Administrator institute proceedings under
this section if, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, the cost of
collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency
determination to the person or entity allegedly owing the tax, which notice
shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate
of 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax from the
date on which the tax should have been received by the city. Within 14 calendar
days after the date of service of such notice, the person or entity allegedly
owing the tax may request in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on
the matter.
   (C)   If the person or entity allegedly owing the tax fails to request a
hearing within the prescribed time period, the amount of the deficiency
determination shall become final assessment, and shall immediately be due and
owing to the city. If the person requests a hearing, the Tax Administrator
shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which shall be scheduled within
30 days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time
and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the Tax Administrator to such
person or entity at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the
Tax Administrator desires said person or entity to produce specific records at
such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced.
   (D)   At the time fixed for the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall hear
all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested
parties. At the discretion of the Tax Administrator, the hearing may be
continued, from time to time, for the purpose of allowing the presentation of
additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the
hearing, the Tax Administrator shall issue a final assessment (or non-
assessment) thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original
deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to
person or entity owing the tax. The decision of the Tax Administrator may be
appealed pursuant to §
3.46.150. Filing an application with the Tax Administrator and appeal to the
City Manager is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.
   (E)   Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not
received by the Tax Administrator on or before the thirtieth day following the
date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency
shall be 15% on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the
rate of 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax,
exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The
applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the city seeking payment
of a tax assessed under this chapter shall commence from the date of
delinquency as provided in this division (E).
   (F)   All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage
prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the
date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing.
§ 3.46.110 ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY - NON-PAYING SERVICE USERS.
   (A)   Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has
deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the
amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the Tax
Administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she may relieve
such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this chapter from
certain named service users for specific billing periods. To the extent the
service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two or
more billing periods, the service supplier may, in the discretion of the Tax
Administrator, be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The service
supplier shall provide the city with the names and addresses of such service
users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this chapter if it
is determined by the Tax Administrator to relieve the person required to
collect the tax. Nothing herein shall require that the Tax Administrator
institute proceedings under this section if, in the opinion of the Tax
Administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax
benefit.
   (B)   In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency
penalty at the rate of 15% of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay
interest at the rate of 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount
of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator shall notify the non-paying service user that
the Tax Administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due
for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties
and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal
delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage
prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made
by the person required to collect the tax; or should the service user have a
change of address, to his or her last known address.
   (D)   If the service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator
within 30 days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the
Tax Administrator may impose an additional penalty of 15% of the amount of the
total tax that is owed.
§ 3.46.120 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty and is directed to
enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations
consistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting,
clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance
of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such administrative rules and
regulations shall be on file in the Tax Administrator’s office.
   (C)   Upon a proper showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may make
administrative agreements approved by the City Attorney, with appropriate
conditions, to vary from the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby:
      (1)   Conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier
so long as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance
with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or
      (2)   To avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection
and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to
collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The Tax Administrator
shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the
absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review
shall not exceed a period of three years next preceding the date of receipt of
the written notice by said person from the Tax Administrator. Upon completion
of the audit, the Tax Administrator may make a deficiency determination,
pursuant to §
3.46.100, for all taxes (and applicable penalties and interest) owed and not
paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the Tax
Administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient
records to enable the Tax Administrator to verify compliance with this chapter,
the Tax Administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the
deficiency. Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable
presumption of correctness.
   (E)   (1)   Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good
cause, the Tax Administrator may extend the time for filing any statement
required pursuant to this chapter for a period of not to exceed 45 days;
provided that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed
when the request is received.
      (2)   No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such
extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension at the rate of 0.75% per
month, prorated for any portion thereof.
   (F)   The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person
who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this
chapter.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the Tax
Administrator, with the approval of the Mayor and City Council, may waive any
penalty or interest imposed upon a person required to collect and/or remit for
failure to collect the tax imposed by this chapter if the non-collection
occurred in good faith. In determining whether the non-collection was in good
faith, the Tax Administrator shall take into consideration industry practice or
other precedence.
§ 3.46.130 RECORDS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit
to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period
of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the
amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and
remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator shall
have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.
   (B)   The city may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to
deliver, to the Tax Administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by
the Tax Administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the
delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if
such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary
course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to
the Tax Administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative
subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the city on or
before the due date; provided that such person shall reimburse the city for all
reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city to inspect those records,
including travel, lodging, meals and other similar expenses, but excluding the
normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the city to
conduct the inspection.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator is authorized to execute a non-disclosure
agreement approved by the City Attorney to protect the confidentiality of
customer information pursuant to Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, §§ 7284.6 and
7284.7.
   (D)   If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to
bill, collect and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall:
      (1)   Provide to the Tax Administrator the name, address and telephone
number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the
service supplier to bill, collect and/or remit the tax to the city; and
      (2)   Upon request of the Tax Administrator, deliver, or effect the
delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent
or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, is
necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or
remittance of such tax to the city.
   (E)   (1)   If any person subject to record-keeping under this section
unreasonably denies the Tax Administrator access to such records, or fails to
produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time
specified, then the Tax Administrator may impose a penalty of $500 on such
person for each day following:
         (a)   The initial date that the person refuses to provide such access;
or
         (b)   The due date for production of records as set forth in the
administrative subpoena.
      (2)   This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed
under this chapter.
§ 3.46.140 REFUNDS.
   Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or
has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax
Administrator under this chapter from a service user or service supplier, it
may be refunded as provided in this section.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid or
paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received
by the Tax Administrator under this chapter from a service user or service
supplier; provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this
section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor or
administrator has submitted a written claim to the Tax Administrator within one
year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such
claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records
showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim
on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers unless each member of the class has
submitted a written claim under penalty of perjury as provided by this division
(A).
   (B)   The filing of a written claim pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, § 935 is a
prerequisite to any suit thereon. Any action brought against the city pursuant
to this section shall be subject to the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 945.6
and 946. The City Manager, or the Mayor and City Council where the claim is in
excess of $10,000, shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set
forth in Cal. Gov’t Code, § 912.4. If the City Manager/Mayor and City Council
fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the time prescribed by Cal.
Gov’t Code, § 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the
City Manager/Mayor and City Council on the last day of the period within which
the City Manager/Mayor and City Council was required to act upon the claim as
provided in Cal. Gov’t Code, § 912.4. The Risk Manager shall give notice of the
action in a form which substantially complies with that set forth in Cal. Gov’t
Code, § 913.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the notice provisions of division (A) above, a service
supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax
imposed by this chapter and actually due from a service user (whether due to
overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax) may refund such
amount to the service user, or credit to charges subsequently payable by the
service user to the service supplier, and claim credit for such overpayment
against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns to the
Tax Administrator; provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later
than one year from the date of overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection
of said tax, and provided that the Tax Administrator shall first determine the
validity of the service user’s claim of credit and the underlying basis for
such claim.
   (D)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (C) above, a service supplier
shall be entitled to take any overpayment as a credit against an underpayment
whenever such overpayment has been received by the city within the three years
next preceding a deficiency determination or assessment by the Tax
Administrator in connection with an audit instituted by the Tax Administrator
pursuant to §
3.46.120(D). A service supplier shall not be entitled to said credit unless it
clearly establishes the right to the credit by written records showing
entitlement thereto. Under no circumstances shall an overpayment taken as a
credit against an underpayment pursuant to this division (D) qualify a service
supplier for a refund to which it would not otherwise be entitled under the
one-year written claim requirement of this section.
§ 3.46.150 APPEALS.
   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a
decision relating to a refund pursuant to §
3.46.140), deficiency determination, assessment or administrative ruling of the
Tax Administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision
relating to a refund pursuant to §
3.46.140), deficiency determination, assessment or administrative ruling of the
Tax Administrator shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of
this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit
thereon. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf
of a class or group of taxpayers.
   (B)   If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision
relating to a refund pursuant to §
3.46.140), deficiency determination, assessment or administrative ruling of the
Tax Administrator, he or she may appeal to the City Manager by filing a notice
of appeal with the City Clerk within 14 days of the date of the decision,
deficiency determination, assessment, administrative ruling of the Tax
Administrator which aggrieved the service user or service supplier.
   (C)   The matter shall be scheduled for hearing before an independent
hearing officer selected by the City Manager, no more than 45 days from the
receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time
and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five
calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued, from time to
time, upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the
Tax Administrator and any other interested person may present such relevant
evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the
appeal is taken.
   (D)   Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the
city’s files, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice and order
upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is
taken. The notice shall be given within 14 days after the conclusion of the
hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify
that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be
filed within 90 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Cal. Code
of Civil Procedure, § 1094.6.
   (E)   All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage
prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the
date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing.
§ 3.46.160 NO INJUNCTION/WRIT OF MANDATE.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against this city or
against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this
chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or
remitted.
§ 3.46.170 NOTICE OF CHANGES TO ORDINANCE.
   If a tax under this chapter is added, repealed, increased by voter approval,
reduced or the tax base is changed, the Tax Administrator shall follow the
notice requirements of Cal. Public Utilities Code, § 799.
§ 3.46.180 FUTURE AMENDMENT TO CITED STATUTE.
   Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal
statute in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time
to time.
§ 3.46.190 INDEPENDENT AUDIT OF TAX COLLECTION, EXEMPTION, REMITTANCE AND
EXPENDITURE.
   The city shall annually verify that the taxes owed under this chapter have
been properly applied, exempted, collected and remitted in accordance with this
chapter, and properly expended according to applicable municipal law. The
annual verification shall be performed by a qualified independent third party
and the review shall employ reasonable, cost-effective steps to assure
compliance, including the use of sampling audits. The verification shall not be
required of tax remitters where the cost of the verification may exceed the tax
revenues to be reviewed.
§ 3.46.200 NO INCREASE IN TAX PERCENTAGE OR CHANGE IN METHODOLOGY WITHOUT VOTER
APPROVAL.
   (A)   Regarding §
3.46.040, the city may not increase the tax percentage or change a methodology
for calculating the tax so as to result in an increase in a tax imposed on a
person, without voter approval.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, §
53750, the city may make the following changes without voter approval:
      (1)   Reduce the percentage rate, and at any time thereafter increase
such percentage rate, so long as the subsequent increase does not exceed the
rate previously approved by the voters in the enactment of this chapter;
      (2)   Change the methodology so as to reduce the amount of the tax being
levied, and, at any time thereafter, change the methodology, so long as the
subsequent change in methodology does not result in an increase in the amount
being levied under the methodology previously approved by the voters in the
enactment of this chapter;
      (3)   Change a methodology or definition so as to avoid or eliminate a
discriminatory tax on taxpayers that are similarly situated, so long as the
change does not result in an increase in the amount levied on such class of
similarly situated taxpayers under the methodology or definition previously
approved by the voters in the enactment of this chapter;
      (4)   Establish a class of persons that is exempt or excepted from one or
more taxes hereunder, and, at any time thereafter, discontinue such exemption
or exception;
      (5)   Decide that all or a part of a tax imposed under §
3.46.040 should not be enforced for administrative reasons, and, at any time
thereafter, decide to enforce the full amount of such tax as previously
approved by the voters in the enactment of this chapter;
      (6)   Establish, and, at any time thereafter, change, the value and/or
apportionment (including a “safe harbor” percentage) of taxable and non-taxable
services that are bundled or packaged under a combined charge, in response to
changes in the marketing of combined services and the components thereof, or in
reevaluating the values thereof; or
      (7)   Establish exemptions or lower rate percentages for industrial or
economic development zones or for classes of customers therein, establish
rebate programs for the purposes of encouraging economic development and, at
any time thereafter, discontinue such exemptions or lower rate percentages.
§ 3.46.210 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available
under any other provision of law or equity, including, but not limited to, the
State False Claims Act (Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 12650 et seq.) and the State Unfair
Practices Act (Cal. Business and Professions Code, §§ 17070 et seq.), are
cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use
of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 3.46.220 INTERACTION WITH PRIOR TAX.
   (A)   Collection of tax by service providers. Service providers shall begin
to collect the tax imposed by this chapter as soon as feasible after the
effective date of this chapter, but, in no event, later than permitted by the
Cal. Public Utilities Code, § 799.
   (B)   Satisfaction of tax obligation by service users. Any person who pays
the tax levied pursuant to §
3.46.040 with respect to any charge for a communication service shall be deemed
to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied, pursuant to §§
3.44.030 and
3.44.040, with respect to that charge. Likewise, prior to August 1, 2008, any
person who pays the tax levied pursuant to §§
3.44.030 and
3.44.040 with respect to any charge for a service subject to taxation pursuant
to this chapter shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay
the tax levied pursuant to §
3.46.040 with respect to that charge. The intent of this division (B) is to
prevent the imposition of multiple taxes upon a single utility charge during
the transition period from the prior telephone and video users’ tax to the new
communications users’ tax (which transition period ends August 1, 2008) and to
permit communications service providers, during that transition period, to
satisfy their collection obligations by collecting either tax.
§ 3.46.230 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-1263, passed 2-11-2008)
CHAPTER 3.48: REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Section
   
3.48.010   Citation
   
3.48.020   Imposition - rate
   
3.48.030   Payment of tax
   
3.48.040   Exemptions - securing debt
   
3.48.050   Exemptions - political or governmental entities
   
3.48.060   Exemptions - conveyances affecting reorganization or adjustment
   
3.48.070   Exemptions - conveyances affecting SEC order
   
3.48.080   Exemptions - transfer of interest in partnership
   
3.48.090   Exemptions - foreclosure
   
3.48.100   Administration
   
3.48.110   Claims for refunds
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, §§ 11901 et seq.
§ 3.48.010 CITATION.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Real Property
Transfer Tax Ordinance” of the city. It is adopted pursuant to the authority
contained in the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 2, Part 6.7
(commencing with § 11901).
(Ord. 2867, passed 11-28-1967)
§ 3.48.020 IMPOSITION - RATE.
   There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands,
tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned,
transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or
purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his, her or their direction,
when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive
of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds $100, a tax at the rate of $27.50 for each $500 or fractional part
thereof.
(Ord. 2867, passed 11-28-1967)
§ 3.48.030 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to §
3.48.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or
instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made,
signed or issued.
(Ord. 2867, passed 11-28-1967)
§ 3.48.040 EXEMPTIONS - SECURING DEBT.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument
in writing given to secure a debt.
(Ord. 2867, passed 11-28-1967)
§ 3.48.050 EXEMPTIONS - POLITICAL OR GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES.
   Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or
instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision
thereof, is a party, shall be exempt from any tax imposed by this chapter when
the exempt agency is acquiring title.
(Ord. 2867, passed 11-28-1967; Ord. 3848, passed 7-11-1979)
§ 3.48.060 EXEMPTIONS - CONVEYANCES AFFECTING REORGANIZATION OR ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the
making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of
reorganization or adjustment:
      (1)   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
      (2)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving
a railroad corporation, as defined in 2 U.S.C. § 205(m), as amended;
      (3)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving
a corporation, as defined in 2 U.S.C. § 506(3), as amended; or
      (4)   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is
effected.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(1) through (A)(4) above shall only apply if the making,
delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five
years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.
(Ord. 2867, passed 11-28-1967; Ord. 3848, passed 7-11-1979)
§ 3.48.070 EXEMPTIONS - CONVEYANCES AFFECTING SEC ORDER.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or
delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and
Exchange Commission, as defined in I.R.C. § 1083(a) of 1954; but only if:
   (A)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, in obedience to
which such conveyance is made, recites that such conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of 15 U.S.C. § 79k, relating to the
Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;
   (B)   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; and
   (C)   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.
(Ord. 2867, passed 11-28-1967)
§ 3.48.080 EXEMPTIONS - TRANSFER OF INTEREST IN PARTNERSHIP.
   (A)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be
imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a
partnership or otherwise if:
      (1)   Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a
continuing partnership within the meaning of I.R.C. § 708 of 1954; and
      (2)   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
   (B)   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of
I.R.C. § 708 of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be
treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed (for fair
market value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon) all realty held by
such partnership at the time of such termination.
   (C)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by
reason of a termination described in division (B) above, and any transfer
pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the
time of such termination.
(Ord. 2867, passed 11-28-1967)
§ 3.48.090 EXEMPTIONS - FORECLOSURE.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any
deed, instrument or writing to a beneficiary or mortgage, which is taken from
the mortgagor to trust or as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided
that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the
unpaid debt, including accrued unpaid interest and cost of foreclosure.
Consideration, unpaid debt amount and identification of grantee as beneficiary
or mortgage shall be noted on the deed, instrument or writing or stated in an
affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury for tax purposes.
(Ord. 2867, passed 11-28-1967; Ord. 3354, passed 6-8-1973; Ord. 3848, passed 7-
11-1979)
§ 3.48.100 ADMINISTRATION.
   The County Recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the
provisions of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 2, Part 6.7 and the
provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 2867, passed 11-28-1967)
§ 3.48.110 CLAIMS FOR REFUNDS.
   Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
governed by the provisions of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 1,
Part 9, Chapter 5 (commencing with § 5096).
(Ord. 2867, passed 11-28-1967)
CHAPTER 3.52: UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1006, passed 11-18-1997)
CHAPTER 3.54: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1127, passed 7-16-2002)
CHAPTER 3.55: TRANSIENT LODGING TAX
Section
   
3.55.010   Definitions
   
3.55.020   Tax imposed - rate - revenue measure
   
3.55.030   Collection of tax
   
3.55.035   Exemptions
   
3.55.040   Reports and remittances
   
3.55.045   Refunds
   
3.55.050   Penalties
   
3.55.060   Determination of tax by City Clerk
   
3.55.065   Appeal
   
3.55.070   Records
   
3.55.080   Hotel registration
   
3.55.090   Immediate payment of tax on cessation of business
   
3.55.100   Sale or ownership transfer of hotel
   
3.55.110   Liens
   
3.55.120   Action to collect
   
3.55.130   Retention and inspection of records
   
3.55.140   Violation - penalty
   
3.55.150   Enforcement - citing authority
   
3.55.160   Prerequisite for suit
   
3.55.170   Amendments
   
3.55.180   Severability
Editor’s note:
   This ordinance was approved by a majority of the voters of the city at the
November 5, 2002 statewide general election.
Statutory reference:
   For provisions authorizing cities to levy a transient occupancy tax, see
Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, §§ 7280 and 7281
§ 3.55.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOTEL. A commercial establishment furnishing lodging space in exchange for
monetary compensation. Every such establishment shall constitute a HOTEL for
purposes of this chapter notwithstanding any advertising describing the
facility as a hostelry, inn, motel, rooming house, tourist home or similar
enterprise.
   LODGING SPACE. One or more rooms used or intended to be used for dwelling or
sleeping purposes.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of
a lodging space.
   OPERATOR. The person who is the proprietor of a hotel. If an OPERATOR
utilizes a managing agent who is not an employee, then such agent shall also
constitute an OPERATOR for purposes of this chapter. Compliance with this
chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall constitute
compliance by both.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or
combination acting as a unit.
   ROOM RENTAL. The total charge for lodging space.
   TRANSIENT. A person who, for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or
less, exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession,
permit, right of access, license or contract. Every such person shall
constitute a TRANSIENT for purposes of this chapter until expiration of the 30-
day period, unless such person has executed a written contract with the
operator to provide for occupancy in excess of 30 consecutive calendar days and
the contract cannot be terminated without providing at least 30 days’ advance
notice. In determining whether a person is a TRANSIENT, portions of calendar
days shall be counted as full days and uninterrupted periods of time extending
both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be
considered.
   TRANSIENT LODGING TAX. The tax levied pursuant to this chapter.
§ 3.55.020 TAX IMPOSED - RATE - REVENUE MEASURE.
   (A)   For the privilege of occupancy in a hotel, each transient is subject
to and shall pay a transient lodging tax in the amount of 10% of the room
rental charged by the operator.
   (B)   The transient lodging tax is levied for revenue purposes and is
necessary for the usual financial operation of the city. When collected, the
tax shall be made a part of the General Funds of the city.
§ 3.55.030 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   Each operator receiving a room rental payment that is subject to the
transient lodging tax, at the time of receipt of the room rental payment, shall
collect the amount of the tax imposed. The operator shall provide a receipt for
payment of the transient lodging tax to the transient.
   (B)   If the monetary compensation received by an operator from a transient
includes any charge for services or accommodations besides lodging space, then
the room rental portion of such compensation shall be billed to the transient
as a separate item.
   (C)   Transient lodging taxes collected by an operator shall be held in
trust until remitted to the city.
   (D)   No operator shall represent to the public that the transient lodging
tax will not be added to the room rental charge, will be absorbed by the
operator or will be refunded in a manner contrary to this chapter.
   (E)   In lieu of paying the transient lodging tax to an operator, a
transient may remit the tax directly to the Department of Finance and
Management Services. Any transient who opts to remit the transient lodging tax
directly to the Department of Finance and Management Services shall provide
written proof of such remittance to the operator.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.55.035 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Grounds. No transient lodging tax shall be imposed upon:
      (1)   Any officer or employee of the United States government or the
state for lodging space utilized by that officer or employee in the discharge
of official government business;
      (2)   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty;
      (3)   Room rental payment made to any hospital, medical clinic,
convalescent home or home for aged people; and
      (4)   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond
the power of the city to impose the tax.
   (B)   Procedure. Each transient desiring an exemption from the transient
lodging tax must file a tax exemption certificate with the hotel at the time
room rental payment is made to the operator. The tax exemption certificate
shall indicate the basis for the exemption and shall be signed under penalty of
perjury. Tax exemption certificate forms shall be prescribed by, and may be
obtained from, the Department of Finance and Management Services.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.55.040 REPORTS AND REMITTANCES.
   (A)   On or before the twenty-fifth day of each month, each operator shall
deliver to the Department of Finance and Management Services a lodging
information report for the prior month and shall remit to the Department of
Finance and Management Services the transient lodging tax collected during the
prior month.
   (B)   The lodging information report shall indicate the amount received for
room rental and the amount of transient lodging tax required to be collected,
and shall be signed under penalty of perjury.
   (C)   Lodging information report forms shall be prescribed by, and may be
obtained from, the Department of Finance and Management Services.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.55.045 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Operator grounds. An operator who has remitted a transient lodging tax
to the city may obtain a refund of all or a part of such remittance in the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The tax was collected from a person who was not a transient;
      (2)   The amount of tax collected from a transient exceeds the amount
due;
      (3)   The amount of tax remitted by the operator exceeds the amount due;
and
      (4)   The city lacked the authority to impose the tax.
   (B)   Transient grounds. A transient who has remitted a transient lodging
tax directly to the city, rather than indirectly by means of payment to an
operator, may obtain a refund of all or a part of such remittance in the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The tax was collected from a person who was not a transient;
      (2)   The amount of tax remitted by the transient exceeds the amount due;
and
      (3)   The city lacked the authority to impose the tax.
   (C)   Procedure. Each person desiring a refund must file a refund claim with
the Department of Finance and Management Services within three years of the
date of remittance of the transient lodging tax. The refund claim shall
indicate the basis for the refund and shall be signed under penalty of perjury.
Refund claim forms shall be prescribed by, and may be obtained from, the
Department of Finance and Management Services. No refund shall be paid unless
the claimant produces written records demonstrating entitlement to the refund.
The Department of Finance and Management Services shall refund any tax
improperly paid by any person directly to such person.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.55.050 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Delinquency.
      (1)   An operator who remits a transient lodging tax between the first
day and the twenty-ninth day following the deadline for such remittance shall
pay, in addition to the amount of the tax, a delinquency penalty of 25% of the
amount of the tax.
      (2)   An operator who remits a transient lodging tax between the
thirtieth day and the sixtieth day following the deadline for such remittance
shall pay, in addition to the amount of the tax, a delinquency penalty of 50%
of the amount of the tax.
      (3)   An operator who remits a transient lodging tax after the sixtieth
day following the deadline for such remittance shall pay in addition to the
amount of the tax the following penalties:
         (a)   A delinquency penalty of 100% of the amount of the tax; and
         (b)   Interest on the total of the tax and the delinquency penalty.
Interest shall be at the rate of 10% per annum and shall be computed from the
sixty-first day of delinquency until the date of remittance of the tax and
delinquency penalty to the Department of Finance and Management Services.
   (B)   Fraud. If the Department of Finance and Management Services determines
that the non-payment of a transient lodging tax is due to fraud of the
operator, then the operator shall pay, in addition to the amount of the tax, a
fraud penalty of 25% of the amount of the tax.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.55.060 DETERMINATION OF TAX BY CITY CLERK.
   (A)   Determination. If an operator fails to collect and remit the transient
lodging tax in accordance with this chapter, then the Department of Finance and
Management Services shall determine the amount of tax owed by such operator.
The Department of Finance and Management Services may make such determination
based on an estimate of the amount due based on the information available.
   (B)   Notice. Upon determining the amount of transient lodging tax and
penalty due, the Department of Finance and Management Services shall notify the
operator in writing. If the operator does not request a hearing on such amount
in writing within ten days of the date of issuance of the notice, then the
amount shall be conclusive and shall be remitted to the city on or before the
deadline specified in the notice.
   (C)   Hearing. If a timely hearing request is made, then the Department of
Finance and Management Services shall notify the operator in writing of the
date, time and place of a hearing on the amount of transient lodging tax and
penalty owed to the city at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At
such hearing, the operator may offer evidence to rebut the determination of the
Department of Finance and Management Services. After such hearing, the
Department of Finance and Management Services shall revise the initial
determination as deemed appropriate and shall notify the operator in writing of
the final determination of the transient lodging tax and penalty that is due.
Such amount shall be remitted to the city within 15 days from the issuance of
the notice, unless an appeal is filed as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.55.065 APPEAL.
   Any operator who is aggrieved by a Department of Finance and Management
Services decision regarding the amount of transient lodging tax or penalty owed
by the operator may appeal to the Mayor and City Council in accordance with the
provisions of
Chapter 2.64. Any transient who is aggrieved by a Department of Finance and
Management Services decision regarding the amount of transient lodging tax owed
by the transient may appeal to the Mayor and City Council in accordance with
the provisions of
Chapter 2.64. Any amount that the Mayor and City Council determines is owed to
the city shall be remitted to the Department of Finance and Management Services
on or before the deadline set by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.55.070 RECORDS.
   (A)   Registration cards.
      (1)   Each operator shall complete and maintain a transient registration
card for every transient that is provided lodging space in the operator’s
hotel. At a minimum, transient registration cards shall list the following
information:
         (a)   The name of a person who will occupy, or who is entitled to
occupy, the lodging space;
         (b)   The total number of people who will occupy, or who are entitled
to occupy, the lodging space;
         (c)   The identification of the lodging space by number;
         (d)   The date the occupancy will commence and the expected date of
termination; and
         (e)   The room rental to be charged for the lodging space.
      (2)   Transient registration cards shall bear consecutive numbers that
shall be preprinted on the cards by a print shop or manufacturer of the cards.
Voided cards shall be kept for audit purposes.
   (B)   Daily summary sheets.
      (1)   Each operator shall maintain a daily summary sheet for each day its
hotel is open for business.
      (2)   At a minimum, daily summary sheets shall contain the following
information:
         (a)   The name of a person who will occupy, or who is entitled to
occupy, each lodging space that is provided to a customer that day;
         (b)   The identification by number of each lodging space provided to a
customer;
         (c)   The daily room rental charge and amount paid for each lodging
space provided to a transient; and
         (d)   The number of the transient registration card applicable to each
lodging space provided to a transient.
§ 3.55.080 HOTEL REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, or within 30 days after commencing business, whichever is later,
each operator of a hotel providing lodging space to transients shall register
such hotel with the Department of Finance and Management Services.
   (B)   Upon registration, the Department of Finance and Management Services
shall issue the operator a “transient lodging registration certificate” that,
at a minimum, states the following:
      (1)   The name of the operator;
      (2)   The address of the hotel;
      (3)   The issuance date of the certificate; and
      (4)   This transient lodging registration certificate signifies that the
person named on the face thereof has fulfilled the requirements of this
Transient Lodging Tax Ordinance by registering with the Department of Finance
and Management Services for the purpose of collecting from transients the
transient lodging tax and remitting said tax to the Department of Finance and
Management Services. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct
any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner,
nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable
laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board,
commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not
constitute a permit.
   (C)   Each operator shall, at all times, conspicuously post its transient
lodging certificate on the premises of its hotel.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.55.090 IMMEDIATE PAYMENT OF TAX ON CESSATION OF BUSINESS.
   Any operator who ceases providing lodging space to transients shall deliver
to the Department of Finance and Management Services a final lodging
information report and shall remit to the Department of Finance and Management
Services any transient lodging tax owed the city. Such delivery and remittance
shall be performed within 25 days of the operator’s cessation of such activity.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.55.100 SALE OR OWNERSHIP TRANSFER OF HOTEL.
   If an operator sells or otherwise transfers ownership of its hotel, then the
operator’s successor shall be responsible for remittance of any transient
lodging tax and penalty owed by the operator to the city.
§ 3.55.110 LIENS.
   (A)   The Department of Finance and Management Services shall periodically
prepare for the Mayor and City Council a report showing:
      (1)   Delinquent transient lodging taxes and penalties that have not been
received by the city; and
      (2)   The corresponding parcel number designations and addresses of the
properties on which the hotels are operated. The Mayor and City Council shall
consider such report and hear any objections thereto at a hearing for which no
less than a ten-day advance written notice has been provided to the subject
operators and property owners. The Mayor and City Council may modify the report
as deemed necessary and shall confirm the final report by resolution.
   (B)   The Department of Finance and Management Services shall file a
certified copy of the confirmation resolution with the County Auditor,
directing that the unpaid transient lodging taxes and penalties be entered as
lien charges against the respective properties as they appear on the current
assessment rolls. Liens will be collected at the same time and in the same
manner, subject to the same penalties and interest upon delinquencies, as the
general taxes for the city are collected. The Department of Finance and
Management Services shall present for recording appropriate notices of the
imposition of these liens with the County Recorder.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.55.120 ACTION TO COLLECT.
   (A)   Responsibility for debt. Any transient lodging tax required to be paid
by a transient under the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a debt
owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax that has been collected by an
operator but has not been paid to the city shall constitute a debt owed by the
operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions
of this chapter shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city
for the recovery of such amount.
   (B)   Obligation of operator. Each operator shall be obligated to pay to the
city all transient lodging taxes actually collected, as well as the amount of
any such taxes that were lawfully imposed but not collected by the operator.
This obligation includes the duty to pay to the city all penalties and interest
specified by law.
§ 3.55.130 RETENTION AND INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   (A)   Retention. Each operator shall retain, for no less than three years,
the records required to be maintained by this chapter. The three-year period
shall commence on the date of the deadline for remittance of the transient
lodging tax to which the record pertains.
   (B)   Inspection. City representatives may inspect, upon voluntary
production by the operator or compelled production pursuant to subpoena, the
records required to be maintained by this chapter.
§ 3.55.140 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who willfully violates this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who knowingly makes any fraudulent representation on a
document required by this chapter to be maintained or delivered to the city
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person who willfully aids another person to violate division (B)
above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   A prosecution for violation of this chapter shall be instituted within
five years after the commissions of the offense, or within two years after the
discovery of the violation, whichever is later.
§ 3.55.150 ENFORCEMENT - CITING AUTHORITY.
   It shall be the duty of the Department of Finance and Management Services,
or its authorized representatives, to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
The Director of Finance and Management Services, and his or her authorized
representatives, are authorized and empowered to issue citations and notices to
appear for violations of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.55.160 PREREQUISITE FOR SUIT.
   No suit or proceeding shall be maintained in any court for the recovery of
any amount alleged to have been erroneously or illegally determined or
collected unless a refund claim has been duly filed.
§ 3.55.170 AMENDMENTS.
   Any increase of the amount of the tax that is imposed by this chapter, which
is set forth in §
3.55.020(A), shall be approved by a majority vote of the voters at an election,
in accordance with applicable provisions of state law. Any other amendments to
the provisions of this chapter shall be adopted by the City Council.
§ 3.55.180 SEVERABILITY.
   If any part or provision of this chapter is in conflict or inconsistent with
applicable provisions of federal or state statutes, or is otherwise held to be
invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such part or
provision shall be suspended and superseded by such applicable law or
regulations, and the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 2811, passed 4-11-1967; Ord. 3433, passed 6-24-1974; Ord. 3846, passed 7-
11-1979; Ord. MC-288, passed 7-7-1983; Ord. MC-296, passed 8-3-1983; Ord. MC-
376, passed 6-5-1984; Ord. MC-702, passed 1-27-1990; Ord. MC-732, passed 6-18-
1990; Ord. MC-805, passed 9-18-1991; Ord. MC-1006, passed 11-18-1997; Ord. MC-
1026, passed 7-23-1998; Ord. MC-1127, passed 7-16-2002)
CHAPTER 3.56: UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
Section
   
3.56.010   Short title
   
3.56.020   Purpose
   
3.56.030   Sales tax - imposition
   
3.56.040   Sales tax - adoption of state statutes
   
3.56.050   Sales tax - seller’s permit
   
3.56.060   Sales tax - exemptions
   
3.56.070   Use tax - imposition
   
3.56.080   Use tax - adoption of state statutes
   
3.56.090   Use tax - exemptions
   
3.56.100   Amendments
   
3.56.110   Enjoining collection forbidden
Statutory reference:
   For provisions authorizing cities to impose sales and use taxes, see Cal.
Gov’t Code, § 37101
   For provisions on uniform local sales and use taxes, see Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code, §§ 7200 et seq.
§ 3.56.010 SHORT TITLE.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local
Sales and Use Tax Ordinance” of the city.
(Ord. 2118, passed 5-31-1956)
§ 3.56.020 PURPOSE.
   The Mayor and City Council declare that the ordinance codified in this
chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and direct
that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those
purposes:
   (A)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code,
Division 2, Part 1.5;
   (B)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state insofar as those
provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained
in the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 2, Part 1.5;
   (C)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a 1% tax and
provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State
Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to,
and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and
administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in
administering and collecting the state sales and use taxes; and
   (D)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a
manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of the
said Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 2, Part 1.5, minimize the cost of
collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of
record-keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2118, passed 5-31-1956; Ord. 2592, passed 7-7-1964; Ord. 3529, passed 9-
16-1975)
§ 3.56.030 SALES TAX - IMPOSITION.
   (A)   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a
tax is imposed upon retailers in the city at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold
at retail in the city on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified
in this chapter.
   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at
the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property
sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state
destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination.
The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such
charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to
which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of
business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or
places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under
rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the Board of
Equalization.
(Ord. 2118, passed 5-31-1956; Ord. 2406, passed 12-19-1961; Ord. 3529, passed
9-16-1975)
§ 3.56.040 SALES TAX - ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code,
Division 2, Part 1.5, all of the provisions of Division 2, Part I of said Code,
as amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1956, applicable to sales taxes
are adopted and made a part of §§
3.56.030 through
3.56.060 as though fully set forth in this section.
   (B)   Wherever, and to the extent that, in the Cal. Revenue and Taxation
Code, Division 2, Part I, the state is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this division (B)
shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the city for the
word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the State
Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of
Equalization or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution of the
state; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in
any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be
taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against
the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the
administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution
be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily
limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where
the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax
with respect to certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from
this tax while those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under
the provisions of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 2, Part I; nor
to impose this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not be
subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code, and, in
addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state
in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence
thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828, as adopted.
(Ord. 2118, passed 5-31-1956)
§ 3.56.050 SALES TAX - SELLER’S PERMIT.
   If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under the Cal. Revenue
and Taxation Code, § 6067, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required
by reason of §§
3.56.030 through
3.56.060.
(Ord. 2118, passed 5-31-1956; Ord. 3378, passed 10-4-1973)
§ 3.56.060 SALES TAX - EXEMPTIONS.
   There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is
measured:
   (A)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer;
   (B)   The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to
operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the
city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of
persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes; and
   (C)   The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to
operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in
which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of
this state, the United States or any foreign government.
(Ord. 2118, passed 5-31-1956; Ord. 3378, passed 10-4-1973; Ord. MC-326, passed
12-20-1983)
§ 3.56.070 USE TAX - IMPOSITION.
   An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the
city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the
operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use or
other consumption in the city at the rate of 1% of the sales price of the
property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are
subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is
made.
(Ord. 2118, passed 5-31-1956; Ord. 3529, passed 9-16-1975)
§ 3.56.080 USE TAX - ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code,
Division 2, Part 1.5, all of the provisions of Part I of Division 2 of said
Code as amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1956, applicable to use
taxes are adopted and made a part of §§
3.56.070 through
3.56.090 as though fully set forth in this section.
   (B)   Wherever, and to the extent that, in the Cal. Revenue and Taxation
Code, Division 2, Part I, the state is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this
division (B) shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of this
city for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the
State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State
Board of Equalization or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution
of the state; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the
state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action
to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof rather than by or
against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident
to the administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the
substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not
necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the
state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption
from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of
tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax
while such storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the
state under the provisions of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 2,
Part I, or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other
consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by
the state under the provisions of that code, and in addition, the name of the
city shall not be substituted for that of the state in the Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code, §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715,
6737, 6797 and 6828 as adopted, and the name of the city shall not be
substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in
this state” in § 6203 nor in the definition of that phrase in § 6203.
(Ord. 2118, passed 5-31-1956; Ord. 2406, passed 12-19-1961)
§ 3.56.090 USE TAX - EXEMPTIONS.
   There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:
   (A)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer;
   (B)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under
a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with the Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code, Division 2, Part 1.5, by any city and county, county or city in
this state;
   (C)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property
purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such
operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in
such vessels for commercial purposes; and
   (D)   In addition to the exemptions provided in the Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code, §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use or other consumption of
tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or
consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a
certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of
this state, the United States or any foreign government.
(Ord. 2118, passed 5-31-1956; Ord. 3378, passed 10-4-1973; Ord. MC-326, passed
12-20-1983)
§ 3.56.100 AMENDMENTS.
   All amendments of the California Revenue and Taxation Code enacted
subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter
which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with the
Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 2, Part 1.5 shall automatically become
a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 2118, passed 5-31-1956)
§ 3.56.110 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this
city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin
the collection under this chapter, or the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code,
Division 2, Part 1.5, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(Ord. 2118, passed 5-31-1956)
Cross-reference:
   For the State Cigarette Tax Law, see Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, §§
30001 et seq.
CHAPTER 3.57: TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
Section
   
3.57.010   Purpose
   
3.57.020   Contract with state
   
3.57.030   Transactions tax rate
   
3.57.040   Place of sale
   
3.57.050   Use tax rate
   
3.57.060   Adoption of provisions of state law
   
3.57.070   Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes
   
3.57.080   Permit not required
   
3.57.090   Exemptions and exclusions
   
3.57.100   Amendments
   
3.57.110   Enjoining collection forbidden
   
3.57.120   Duration of tax
§ 3.57.010 PURPOSE.
   The ordinance incorporated in this chapter is adopted to achieve the
following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
   (A)   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the
provisions of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 2, Part 1.6
(commencing with § 7251) and Division 2, Part 1.7, § 7285.9 which authorizes
the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of
the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at
an election called for that purpose;
   (B)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state insofar
as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations
contained in the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 2, Part 1.6;
   (C)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a
tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by
the State Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts
itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation
from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the
State Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and collecting
the state sales and use taxes; and
   (D)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be
administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible,
consistent with the provisions of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division
2, Part 1.6, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes,
and at the same time, minimize the burden of record-keeping upon persons
subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1551, passed 12-7-2020)
§ 3.57.020 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State
Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to
the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance;
provided that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Department
of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall
nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the
first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a
contract.
(Ord. MC-1551, passed 12-7-2020)
§ 3.57.030 TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the
rate of 1% of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible
personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative
date of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1551, passed 12-7-2020)
§ 3.57.040 PLACE OF SALE.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or
to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross
receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are
subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Department of Tax and Fee
Administration.
(Ord. MC-1551, passed 12-7-2020)
§ 3.57.050 USE TAX RATE.
   An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the
city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the
operative date of this ordinance for storage, use or other consumption in said
territory at the rate of 1% of the sales price of the property. The sales price
shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or
use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
(Ord. MC-1551, passed 12-7-2020)
§ 3.57.060 ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code,
Division 2, Part 1.6, all of the provisions of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation
Code, Division 2, Part 1 (commencing with § 6001) are adopted and made a part
of this chapter as though fully set forth herein.
(Ord. MC-1551, passed 12-7-2020)
§ 3.57.070 LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES.
   In adopting the provisions of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division
2, Part 1:
   (A)   Wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the
name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution
shall not be made when:
      (1)   The word “state” is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, California Victim Compensation Board, California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration, State Treasury or the California
Constitution;
      (2)   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by
or against this city or any agency, officer or employee thereof rather than by
or against the State Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in performing
the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter;
      (3)   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to,
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of
the substitution would be to:
         (a)   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain
sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which
would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or
other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of
the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 2, Part 1; or
         (b)   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the state under the said provision of that code.
      (4)   In reference to the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, §§ 6701, 6702
(except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828.
   (B)   (1)   The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the
phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in the Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code, § 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in § 6203.
      (2)   “A retailer engaged in business in the District” shall also include
any retailer that, in the preceding calendar year or the current calendar year,
has total combined sales of tangible personal property in this state or for
delivery in the state by the retailer and all persons related to the retailer
that exceeds $500,000. For purposes of this section, a person is related to
another person if both persons are related to each other pursuant to 26 U.S.C.
§ 267(b) and the regulations thereunder.
(Ord. MC-1551, passed 12-7-2020)
§ 3.57.080 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under the Cal. Revenue
and Taxation Code, § 6067, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be
required by this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1551, passed 12-7-2020)
§ 3.57.090 EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state or by
any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Bums Uniform Local
Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or
use tax.
   (B)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
tax the gross receipts from:
      (1)   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government;
      (2)   Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a
point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such
point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a
carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this
division (B)(2), delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:
         (a)   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles)
subject to registration pursuant to the Cal. Vehicle Code, Division 3, Chapter
1 (commencing with § 4000), aircraft licensed in compliance with the Cal.
Public Utilities Code, § 21411 and undocumented vessels registered under of the
Cal. Vehicle Code, Division 3.5 (commencing with § 9840), by registration to an
out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by
the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of
residence; and
         (b)   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      (3)   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated
to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the operative date of this chapter;
      (4)   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date
of this chapter; and
      (5)   For the purposes of divisions (B)(3) and (B)(4) above, the sale or
lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
   (C)   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the
storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:
      (1)   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax
ordinance;
      (2)   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in the
Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, §§ 6366 and 6366.1;
      (3)   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this
chapter;
      (4)   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this chapter;
      (5)   For the purposes of divisions (C)(3) and (C)(4) above, storage, use
or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over,
tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a
contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or
lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon
notice, whether or not such right is exercised;
         (6)   Except as provided in division (C)(7) below, a retailer engaged
in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the
purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers
the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale
of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the
order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in
the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary
or person in the city under the authority of the retailer; and
      (7)   “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
the Cal. Vehicle Code, Division 3, Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000); aircraft
licensed in compliance with the Cal. Public Utilities Code, § 21411; or
undocumented vessels registered under the Cal. Vehicle Code, Division 3.5
(commencing with § 9840). That retailer shall be required to collect use tax
from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel or aircraft at
an address in the city.
   (D)   Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to the
Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 2, Part 1.6, with respect to the sale
to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is
subject to the use tax.
(Ord. MC-1551, passed 12-7-2020)
§ 3.57.100 AMENDMENTS.
   All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this chapter to the Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 2, Part 1, relating to sales and use taxes
and which are not inconsistent with the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code,
Division 2, Part 1.6 and 1.7, and all amendments to the Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code, Division 2, Part 1.6 and 1.7, shall automatically become a part
of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as
to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1551, passed 12-7-2020)
§ 3.57.110 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the
city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this chapter, or the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, Division
2, Part 1.6, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(Ord. MC-1551, passed 12-7-2020)
§ 3.57.120 DURATION OF TAX.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall continue until this chapter is
repealed.
(Ord. MC-1551, passed 12-7-2020)
CHAPTER 3.60: CIGARETTE TAX
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
Statutory reference:
    For the State Cigarette Tax Law, see Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, §§
30001 et seq.
CHAPTER 3.64: TAX ON PARKING AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA
Section
   
3.64.010   Parking and business improvement area
   
3.64.020   Rates
   
3.64.030   Proposed uses for proceeds
   
3.64.040   Collection
   
3.64.050   Special fund
   
3.64.060   Issuance of business license - payment of assessment required
   
3.64.070   Delinquency - assessment of penalties
§ 3.64.010 PARKING AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council may establish, by ordinance, in accordance
with state law, one or more parking and business improvement areas within
boundaries as described in the ordinance.
   (B)   There may be imposed upon each type of business, including any
profession, conducted within said parking and business improvement area, an
annual assessment after formation, in addition to the tax imposed upon such
business pursuant to the business licensing provisions of this municipal code.
Such additional assessment shall be imposed at the rates set forth in the
enacting ordinance for the specified classifications regardless of whether the
business is taxed upon a flat rate or gross receipts or other basis, and
reassessed annually as required by state law. Such additional assessment shall
be imposed upon each business in accordance with the classifications set forth
in
Chapter 5.04.
(Ord. 2711, passed 12-14-1965; Ord. 3292, passed 9-25-1972; Ord. MC-1484,
passed 4-18-2018)
§ 3.64.020 RATES.
   Rates for such assessments in addition to business license taxes shall be
established in the ordinance creating each specific parking and business
improvement area, based upon the classifications specified in
Chapter 5.04.
(Ord. 2711, passed 12-14-1965; Ord. 2730, passed 3-15-1966; Ord. MC-1099,
passed 7-9-2001; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 3.64.030 PROPOSED USES FOR PROCEEDS.
   The proposed uses to which the proceeds obtained from the additional
assessments on businesses within the specific area shall be put are:
   (A)   The acquisition, construction and maintenance of parking facilities
for the benefit of the area;
   (B)   Decoration of any public place in the area;
   (C)   Promotion of public events which are to take place on or in public
places in the area;
   (D)   Furnishing of music in any public place in the area; and
   (E)   The general promotion of retail trade activities in the area.
(Ord. 3293, passed 9-25-1972; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 3.64.040 COLLECTION.
   (A)   The collection of the additional tax from any business in the area
shall be made at the same time and in the same manner as any other business
license tax is collected, and the cost of the collection may be paid from the
proceeds obtained from the additional tax or penalties imposed thereunder.
   (B)   All monies and revenue collected pursuant to this chapter and the
applicable enacting ordinance shall be deposited in the General Fund, to be
transferred from the General Fund to the applicable Parking and Business
Improvement Fund as provided in §
3.64.050.
(Ord. 3292, passed 9-25-1972; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 3.64.050 SPECIAL FUND.
   A special fund designated as the Parking and Business Improvement Fund is
created. If more than one parking and business improvement area is created in
the city, a special fund shall be designated for each such area by name. All
monies and revenue collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the
General Fund, and the Department of Finance and Management Services will
prepare monthly a statement showing the monies collected and to be transferred
from the General Fund to each specific Parking and Business Improvement Fund.
(Ord. 2711, passed 12-14-1965; Ord. 3212, passed 11-16-1971; Ord. MC-1484,
passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 3.64.060 ISSUANCE OF BUSINESS LICENSE - PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No business license shall be issued to any business within the
boundaries of the area pursuant to
Chapter 5.04, unless the assessment imposed by the enacting ordinance is paid
together with the business license tax payable pursuant to
Chapter 5.04.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation operating or carrying on a business as
provided for in this section shall be subject to all penalties, both civil and
criminal, as are provided therefor in
Chapter 5.04 and Cal. Business and Professions Code, § 16240 for operating a
business without a valid business license.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 3.64.070 DELINQUENCY - ASSESSMENT OF PENALTIES.
   (A)   The time of delinquency for the assessment of penalties for all
assessments covered by this chapter shall be the same as set forth in §
5.04.075 for the business license tax.
   (B)   Payments of the assessment which are received in the Department of
Finance and Management Services after the applicable delinquent dates, or
bearing a postmark after said dates, as set forth in §
5.04.075, shall be deemed delinquent and subject to penalty assessment.
   (C)   For failure to pay the assessment on or before the start of business,
or for failure to pay the assessment before the applicable delinquent date,
there is imposed a penalty of 50% of the assessment. An additional penalty of
50% of the assessment shall be imposed on the last day of the third consecutive
month of delinquency. Such penalties shall be added to the assessment due.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
CHAPTER 3.68: ASSESSMENTS FOR NUISANCE ABATEMENT
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
CHAPTER 3.70: FEES SET BY RESOLUTION
Section
   
3.70.010   Fees set by resolution
§ 3.70.010 FEES SET BY RESOLUTION.
   Except as otherwise required by law and notwithstanding provisions of this
code to the contrary, all fees provided for by this code or hereafter
established shall be set by resolution of the Mayor and City Council and any
contrary or conflicting fees set forth in this code shall thereafter be
disregarded.
(Ord. MC-745, passed 10-8-1990)
CHAPTER 3.72: USER FEES FOR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
Section
   
3.72.010   Authority to render emergency medical services
   
3.72.020   User fees
§ 3.72.010 AUTHORITY TO RENDER EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
   The Fire Suppression Division of the City Fire Department, when called upon
by citizens of the community, shall respond to emergency medical incidents and
render emergency medical care and lifesaving measures in accordance with the
emergency medical standards established by the county health officer.
(Ord. MC-760, passed 11-27-1990)
§ 3.72.020 USER FEES.
   (A)   Any person receiving emergency medical services of the city shall be
charged a user fee, as established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   User fees shall be charges designed to recover costs associated with
the delivery of paramedic services, and shall be in two tiers:
      (1)   Emergencies requiring basic life support services by City Fire
Department paramedics or emergency medical technicians; and
      (2)   Emergencies requiring advanced life support services by City Fire
Department paramedics.
   (C)   A voluntary “membership fee” shall be offered to residents of the city
for the purpose of assuring members that the membership prepays any insurance
deductible for City Fire Department emergency medical services.
   (D)   Residents participating in the voluntary membership fee program shall
provide to the city information to enable the city to file claims against their
insurance providers, if any, for the user fees. Any payment made by a member’s
insurance provider shall be deemed payment in full, and the member shall incur
no further direct personal liability for said user fees.
   (E)   A charge for delinquent payment of fees for services is authorized, to
be set by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (F)   Verification of membership and/or ability to pay shall not occur at
the scene of any emergency.
   (G)   No emergency medical services shall be denied or delayed to anyone on
the basis of inability to pay or to provide evidence of membership.
(Ord. MC-760, passed 11-27-1990)
CHAPTER 3.73: USER FEES FOR VIDEO PRODUCTION SERVICES
Section
   
3.73.010   Authority to contract for production services
   
3.73.020   User fees
§ 3.73.010 AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT FOR PRODUCTION SERVICES.
   The Telecommunications Division of the city may enter into an agreement to
provide video production services which shall be executed by the City
Administrator.
(Ord. MC-824, passed 3-17-1992)
§ 3.73.020 USER FEES.
   (A)   Any individual, agency or organization contracting for video
production services shall be charged a user fee, as established by resolution
of the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   User fees shall be charges designed to recover costs associated with
the delivery of production services.
   (C)   User may be required to pay a non-refundable deposit of costs as set
by resolution of the Mayor and City Council and as described in the production
agreement. Balance of payment shall be due within ten days of service
completion.
   (D)   A charge for delinquent payment of fees for services is authorized, to
be set by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-824, passed 3-17-1992)
CHAPTER 3.75: DRAINAGE FACILITIES; PUBLIC UTILITIES
Section
   
3.75.010   Drainage facilities; public utilities
   
3.75.020   Utility fees
§ 3.75.010 DRAINAGE FACILITIES; PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   Pursuant to the authority of Cal. Public Utilities Code, § 10001 and the
City Charter, all publicly owned drainage facilities in the city are declared
to be public utilities.
(Ord. MC-828, passed 4-7-1992)
§ 3.75.020 UTILITY FEES.
   The Mayor and City Council may, from time to time, by resolution, adopt
monthly utility drainage service fees, relating to the operation and
maintenance of such drainage facilities.
(Ord. MC-828, passed 4-7-1992)
CHAPTER 3.80: COST RECOVERY SYSTEM FOR BOOKING FEE COLLECTIONS
Section
   
3.80.010   Authority and scope
   
3.80.020   Purpose
   
3.80.030   Definitions
   
3.80.040   Method of assessing amount of fees
   
3.80.050   Amount of fees collected
   
3.80.060   Severability
§ 3.80.010 AUTHORITY AND SCOPE.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 29550 et seq. as the
same may now exist or hereafter be amended.
(Ord. MC-1002, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 3.80.020 PURPOSE.
   The proceeds from this program shall be used to reimburse the city’s General
Fund for costs charged by the county for the booking or other processing of
persons arrested and other costs incurred in connection therewith.
(Ord. MC-1002, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 3.80.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino.
   COUNTY. The County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. MC-1002, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 3.80.040 METHOD OF ASSESSING AMOUNT OF FEES.
   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, § 29550, the city shall charge a fee equal to
the fee assessed by the county to the city for the booking or other processing
of persons arrested, at the request of the city, to the person arrested, if
that person is convicted of a criminal offense related to said arrest.
(Ord. MC-1002, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 3.80.050 AMOUNT OF FEES COLLECTED.
   Fees collected shall be limited to those provided under Cal. Gov’t Code, §§
29550 et seq. The actual cost of recovery over and above the criminal justice
administrative fees shall be charged to the person convicted if applicable.
(Ord. MC-1002, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 3.80.060 SEVERABILITY.
   In any section, division, part, clause, sentence or phrase of this chapter
or the application thereof is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter, the application thereof and
the fee imposed shall not be effected thereby but shall remain in full force
and effect, it being the intention of the City Council to adopt each and every
section, division, part, clause, sentence or phrase regardless of whether any
other section, division, part, clause, sentence or phrase or the application
thereof if held to be invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. MC-1002, passed 9-15-1997)
TITLE 4: RESERVED
[Reserved]
TITLE 5: BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND REGULATIONS
   Chapter
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
5.04.   GENERAL PROVISIONS AND RATES
      
5.05.   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES
      
5.08.   RESERVED
      
5.10.   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES
      
5.12.   RESERVED
      
5.14.   ENTERTAINMENT - DANCES AND ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
      
5.16.   FIRE, REMOVAL OR CLOSING-OUT SALES
      
5.18.   CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
      
5.19.   PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
      
5.20.   MASSAGE PARLORS - MASSAGISTS
      
5.22.   OUTDOOR SALES AND DISPLAYS
      
5.24.   TRANSPORTING PERSONS FOR HIRE
      
5.26.   SHOPPING CARTS
ARTICLE II. SPECIFIC BUSINESSES
      
5.28.   AUTOMOBILE WRECKERS
      
5.30.   SIDEWALK VENDING
      
5.32.   BILLIARD ROOMS AND POOLROOMS
      
5.36.   BINGO GAMES
      
5.40.   CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS IN CENTRAL CITY MALL
      
5.42.   OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT
      
5.44.   COIN-OPERATED GAME MACHINES
      
5.48.   RESERVED
      
5.52.   ESCORT BUREAUS
      
5.56.   JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
      
5.60.   MOTOR BUSES
      
5.64.   MOTOR FUEL SALES
      
5.68.   PERSONAL PROPERTY SALES
      
5.72.   SATELLITE HORSE RACE WAGERING
      
5.76.   TAXICABS AND NON-EMERGENCY MEDICAL VEHICLES
      
5.80.   THEATERS - MOTION PICTURE AND ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
      
5.82.   OPERATOR PERMIT REGULATIONS
      
5.84.   ENFORCEMENT - CITING AUTHORITY
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 5.04: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND RATES
Section
   
5.04.005   Registration certificate
   
5.04.010   Fee - deemed debt
   
5.04.015   Business registration certificate - application - issuance
   
5.04.020   Registration certificate issuance - non-transferable
   
5.04.021   Information confidential
   
5.04.025   Business registration certificate - other permits required
   
5.04.026   Transfers of stock or partnership interest
   
5.04.030   Business registration certificate fees - payable in advance
   
5.04.033   Refund of unused business registration certificate
   
5.04.035   Certificate - posting
   
5.04.040   Constitutional apportionment
   
5.04.045   Reserved
   
5.04.050   Transacting business without registration certificate
   
5.04.051   Advertising
   
5.04.055   Fees based on gross receipts
   
5.04.060   Gross receipts - defined
   
5.04.063   Gross - work outside city
   
5.04.065   Gross receipts - business younger than six months
   
5.04.070   Examination, audit and inspection of financial books and records
   
5.04.071   Failure to file statement
   
5.04.075   Penalties for delinquencies
   
5.04.076   Assessments; delinquent registrations; liens
   
5.04.085   Payment of fees
   
5.04.090   Liquor or intoxicating liquor defined
   
5.04.095   Real estate business
   
5.04.100   Reserved
   
5.04.110   Advertising - distributing samples, handbills or dodgers
   
5.04.115   Reserved
   
5.04.120   Reserved
   
5.04.123   Reserved
   
5.04.125   Auctions
   
5.04.130   Reserved
   
5.04.135   Reserved
   
5.04.140   Billiard or poolroom
   
5.04.145   Reserved
   
5.04.150   Vending machine sales and automatic weighing devices
   
5.04.155   Bowling alley
   
5.04.160   Temporary boxing, wrestling or athletic exhibition
   
5.04.165   Reserved
   
5.04.170   Reserved
   
5.04.175   Reserved
   
5.04.180   Reserved
   
5.04.185   Reserved
   
5.04.190   Reserved
   
5.04.195   Reserved
   
5.04.200   Commission merchant or broker - broker for stocks or bonds
   
5.04.205   Reserved
   
5.04.210   Residential and commercial cleaning
   
5.04.215   Reserved
   
5.04.220   Reserved
   
5.04.225   Reserved
   
5.04.235   Reserved
   
5.04.240   Reserved
   
5.04.245   Exhibitions in theaters or temporary places
   
5.04.250   Reserved
   
5.04.255   Reserved
   
5.04.260   Reserved
   
5.04.265   Fire sale, bankrupt or wreck sale
   
5.04.270   Reserved
   
5.04.275   Game tables, machines or devices
   
5.04.280   Hobby horse machines
   
5.04.285   Music tables, machines or devices
   
5.04.290   Notice to City Clerk of table locations
   
5.04.295   Coin-operated game machines
   
5.04.300   Reserved
   
5.04.305   Reserved
   
5.04.310   Dog kennel
   
5.04.315   Junk dealer
   
5.04.320   Reserved
   
5.04.325   Reserved
   
5.04.330   Reserved
   
5.04.335   Massage parlor
   
5.04.340   Messenger service
   
5.04.345   Private patrol system, armored car service and private police system
   
5.04.350   Pawnbroker
   
5.04.355   Fortune telling
   
5.04.360   Soliciting, selling, advertising and begging
   
5.04.365   Reserved
   
5.04.370   Seller from booth or stand - peddler, flags, banners, balloons,
toys, food and confections
   
5.04.375   Peddler or solicitor - foodstuffs
   
5.04.380   Reserved
   
5.04.385   Christmas tree sales
   
5.04.390   Reserved
   
5.04.395   Reserved
   
5.04.400   Reserved
   
5.04.405   Reserved
   
5.04.410   Reserved
   
5.04.415   Cesspool pumping, collection of rubbish and waste material
   
5.04.420   Collection agency
   
5.04.425   Reserved
   
5.04.430   Reserved
   
5.04.445   Reserved
   
5.04.450   Reserved
   
5.04.455   Reserved
   
5.04.460   Reserved
   
5.04.465   Reserved
   
5.04.470   Reserved
   
5.04.475   Reserved
   
5.04.480   Reserved
   
5.04.485   Reserved
   
5.04.490   Reserved
   
5.04.495   Transient merchants/vendors and temporary businesses prohibited
   
5.04.496   Property owner responsibility for transient merchants/vendors and
temporary businesses
   
5.04.497   Seizure; hearing
   
5.04.498   Penalty
   
5.04.499   Severability
   
5.04.500   Swap meet
   
5.04.504   Telephone solicitation; telemarketing
   
5.04.505   Reserved
   
5.04.507   Reserved
   
5.04.510   Reserved
   
5.04.515   Reserved
   
5.04.520   Vehicles for hire
   
5.04.525   Fees based on gross receipts
   
5.04.526   Increased cost of municipal services
   
5.04.540   Street benches - liability policy required
   
5.04.545   Construction business - contractors
   
5.04.550   Reserved
   
5.04.555   Reserved
   
5.04.560   Painting of house numbers
   
5.04.565   Reserved
   
5.04.570   Reserved
   
5.04.575   Certificates for businesses not otherwise covered by article
   
5.04.580   Reserved
   
5.04.585   Reserved
   
5.04.590   Reserved
   
5.04.595   Solicitors
   
5.04.605   Reserved
   
5.04.610   Determination of fee when two businesses involved
   
5.04.615   Separate certificates for separate locations
   
5.04.620   Fee for vehicles used in conducting business
   
5.04.625   Applicability of chapter to exempt persons
   
5.04.626   Exemption - veterans
   
5.04.630   Applicability of chapter to non-profit organizations
   
5.04.635   Reserved
   
5.04.640   Applicability of criminal and regulatory procedures
   
5.04.645   Fees for revenue purposes
   
5.04.650   Suspension, cancellation or revocation of certificates
   
5.04.655   Duty of auditor
   
5.04.660   Reserved
§ 5.04.005 REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
   It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or herself or for any other person, or for any
body corporate, or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise, to commence
or carry on any business, show, exhibition or game, specified in this article,
in the city, without first having procured a registration certificate from the
city and without complying with any and all regulations of such business, show,
exhibition or game contained in this article; and the carrying on of any
business, show, exhibition or game mentioned in this article without first
having procured a registration certificate from the city, and without complying
with any and all regulations of such business, show, exhibition or game
contained in this article shall constitute a separate violation of this article
for each and every day that such business, show, exhibition or game is so
carried on.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992; Ord. MC-1039, passed
1-12-1999)
§ 5.04.010 FEE - DEEMED DEBT.
   The amount of any fee imposed by this article shall be deemed as debt to the
city; and any person, firm or corporation carrying on any business, show,
exhibition or game mentioned in this article without having a business
registration certificate from the city shall be liable to an action in the name
of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of the fee
imposed by this article on such business, show, exhibition or game.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.015 BUSINESS REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE - APPLICATION - ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Before any business registration certificate is issued to any person,
firm or corporation, such person, firm or corporation shall make written
application therefor to the City Clerk; such application must state the nature
or kind of business, show, exhibition or game for which the registration
certificate is required; the place where such business, show, exhibition or
game will be carried on or conducted; the name of the owner of the business,
show, exhibition or game; and must be signed by the applicant. In cases where
such business, show, exhibition or game is not to be conducted or carried on at
a permanent place of business in the city, then such application shall state
the residence of the owners of such business, show, exhibition or game.
   (B)   No registration certificate shall be issued to any corporation unless
its articles of incorporation, or a certified copy thereof, are filed in the
office of the County Clerk or in the office of the City Clerk.
   (C)   No registration certificate shall be issued to any person, firm or
partnership conducting or carrying on any business, show, exhibition or game,
under a fictitious name, unless an affidavit is filed in the office of the
County Clerk or in the office of the City Clerk showing the true names of the
owners of such business; provided, however, such certificate may be issued in
the true names of the owners of such business, show, exhibition or game without
the filing of such affidavit.
   (D)   (1)   The determination of which business or type or class of business
a business registration certificate holder or an applicant is engaged in shall
be an administrative function of the City Clerk.
      (2)   If a business registration certificate holder or an applicant
believes that his or her business is not assigned to the proper classification
under this chapter because of circumstances peculiar to it, as distinguished
from other businesses of the same kind, he or she may apply in writing to the
City Clerk for reclassification. The application shall contain such information
as the City Clerk deems necessary in order to determine whether the applicant’s
individual business is properly classified.
      (3)   The City Clerk shall then conduct an investigation following which
he or she shall assign the applicant’s individual business to the
classification shown to be proper on the basis of the investigation. The proper
classification is the classification which, in the opinion of the City Clerk,
most nearly fits the applicant’s individual business. The City Clerk shall
notify the applicant of the action taken on the application for
reclassification. Such notice shall be given by serving it personally or by
depositing it in the United States Post Office at San Bernardino, California,
postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at his or her last known address.
   (E)   Each new or renewal business registration application shall be
accompanied by a non-refundable application processing fee established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council which shall be no more than necessary
to cover the costs of processing. This fee shall be in addition to the business
registration fee and shall not be prorated. Daily and monthly business
registration applications shall be exempt from this requirement.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992; Ord. MC-935, passed
4-18-1995; Ord. MC-1272, passed 6-3-2008)
§ 5.04.020 REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE ISSUANCE - NON-TRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   Upon application therefor as provided in §
5.04.015, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to prepare and issue a
business registration certificate hereunder, and to state in each certificate
the amount thereof; the period of time covered thereby; the name of the person,
firm or corporation to whom issued; the business, show, exhibition or game
registered; and the location or place of business where such business, show,
exhibition or game is to be carried on.
   (B)   No certificate granted or issued under any provision of this article
shall be transferred or assigned in any manner, nor is any person, firm or
corporation other than mentioned or named therein authorized to do business
without the written consent of the City Clerk endorsed thereon. At the time any
such business is assigned or transferred, the person applying for such transfer
shall make application for a registration certificate as provided in §
5.04.015, and shall pay a transfer fee of $5 to the City Clerk. In the event a
business location or mailing address is changed, the certificate holder shall
notify the City Clerk of such change and pay a fee of $5.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall make a charge of $0.50 for each duplicate
certificate issued to replace any certificate issued under the provisions of
this article which has been lost or destroyed, in no case shall any mistake
made by the City Clerk in stating the amount of a fee prevent or prejudice the
collection by the city of what shall be actually due from anyone carrying on a
business, show, exhibition or game subject to a registration certificate under
this chapter.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983; Ord. MC-817, passed
1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.021 INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the City Clerk or any person having an
administrative duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known, in any
manner whatever, the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an
investigation of records and equipment of any person required to pay the
registration certificate fee, or any other person visited or examined in the
discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses,
expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or
application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, in
any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined
by any person.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:
      (1)   The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by,
another city official, employee or agent for collection of registration
certificate fees for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any
provisions of this chapter, or collecting registration certificate fees imposed
hereunder;
      (2)   The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by,
federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, or
city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or
court of law, upon subpoena;
      (3)   The disclosure of information and results of examination of records
of particular certificate holders, or relating to particular certificate
holders, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence
or amount of any registration certificate fee liability of the particular
certificate holder to the city;
      (4)   The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that
effect, to a certificate holder, or to his or her successors, receivers,
trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly
interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid
fee, any unpaid registration certificate fee or amounts of fees required to be
collected, interest and penalty; provided, however, that the City Attorney
approve each such disclosure and that the City Clerk may refuse to make any
disclosure referred to in this division (B)(4) when, in his or her opinion, the
public interest would suffer thereby;
      (5)   The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom
certificates have been issued, and the general type or nature of their
business;
      (6)   The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such
information as may be necessary to the Mayor and City Council in order to
permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a certificate holder files a
claim for refund of registration certificate fees, or submits an offer of
compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him or her by the city for
registration certificate fees, or when acting upon any other matter; and
      (7)   The disclosure of general statistics regarding fees collected or
business done in the city.
(Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.025 BUSINESS REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE - OTHER PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation conducting or carrying on any
business, show, exhibition or game without having obtained a business
registration certificate as required by this article shall be nevertheless
liable for any fee or penalties imposed or required to be paid pursuant to §
5.04.010 for the period such business or activity was conducted without such
certificate.
   (B)   No business registration certificate shall be issued to any person,
firm or corporation to conduct or carry on any business, show, exhibition or
game at or in a building or structure in the city unless such person, firm or
corporation is proposing to establish a use permitted in the Land Use Zone
District for the site, and a zoning consistency review has been issued by the
Development Services Department. An approved copy of said zoning consistency
review shall be presented at the time of submitting this written application
for the business registration certificate.
   (C)   No registration certificate issued under the provisions of this
article shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any
illegal or unlawful business or activity or the violation of any ordinance or
law. Any registration certificate issued contrary to the provisions of this
section shall be void and of no effect.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3594, passed 8-3-1976; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-
7-1992; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 5.04.026 TRANSFERS OF STOCK OR PARTNERSHIP INTEREST.
   (A)   Any business registration certificate or any permit issued or granted
pursuant to this title is a privilege to be held by the original permittee or
certificate holder thereof. It cannot be sold, transferred, assigned or
disposed of, in whole or in part, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation
or otherwise.
   (B)   In the event a permittee or certificate holder is a corporation, a new
permit or certificate shall be required when there is an actual change in
control or when ownership of more than 50% of the voting stock of the permittee
or certificate holder is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in
concert, none of whom already own 50% or more of the voting stock, singly or
collectively.
   (C)   In the event a permittee or certificate holder is a partnership, a new
permit or certificate shall be required when there is an actual change in
control or when ownership of 50% or more of the capital or profits of the
permittee or certificate holder is acquired by a person or group of persons
acting in concert, none of whom already own 50% or more of such capital or
profits, singly or collectively.
(Ord. MC-936, passed 4-18-1995)
§ 5.04.030 BUSINESS REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE FEES - PAYABLE IN ADVANCE.
   (A)   All fees shall be paid in advance in legal currency of the United
States at the office of the City Clerk, or by check, draft or other instrument
in the discretion of the City Clerk. Any certificate, the fee for which has
been paid by an instrument, such as a check, draft or money order, which is
dishonored upon presentation for payment, shall be void and of no effect from
its inception, upon notice from the City Clerk of such dishonor. The City Clerk
may, in his or her discretion, withhold the effect of this provision if the fee
is promptly paid. Payment of registration certificate fees following a dishonor
of such an instrument upon presentment for payment shall thereafter be made
only by cashier’s check, money order or cash, which fee shall include any
applicable penalty, as well as the service fee under §
3.10.010 for such dishonored instrument. The City Clerk shall be authorized to
reject payment other than by cash, cashier’s check or money order from such
certificate holder for a period of two years following any such dishonor.
   (B)   A separate registration certificate must be obtained for each branch
establishment or separate place of business in which the business, show,
exhibition or game is carried on. Each registration certificate shall authorize
the party obtaining it to carry on, pursue or conduct only that business, show,
exhibition or game described in such certificate. Where a registration
certificate is required for any business, show, exhibition or game, and the
number of persons employed or the gross receipts of such business is made the
basis for fixing the amount of the registration certificate fee, a separate fee
shall be paid for each branch establishment or place of business in which the
business, show, exhibition or game is carried on, based upon the number of
persons employed in, or the gross receipts of, each branch establishment or
separate place of business.
   (C)   Monthly fees are due and payable on the first of each month in
advance, from all persons who have received a business registration certificate
for the previous month to carry on the same business, show, exhibition or game.
From all persons who have not received such a certificate for the previous
month for the same business, show, exhibition or game, the fee is due and
payable, and must be procured before commencing to carry on such business,
show, exhibition or game.
   (D)   Except as specified in division (H) below, quarterly fees are due and
payable to the city on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1, and such
certificates expire on March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each
year. All business registration certificates shall be reissued annually from
the date of initial issuance and the quarterly fees are due and payable every
three months beginning from the date of initial issuance.
   (E)   Daily and weekly registration certificate fees are due and payable in
advance.
   (F)   Except as provided in division (H) below and as elsewhere provided in
this article, semi-annual fees are due and payable at the times specified in
this article. If the time of payment is not specified, semi-annual fees are due
and payable at the times specified in this article. If the time of payment is
not specified, semi-annual licenses are payable on January 1 and July 1. The
first semi-annual business registration certificate issued to any person shall
be issued for the unexpired period of the one-half year of issuance.
   (G)   Annual fees are due and payable at the time specified in this article.
If the time for payment is not otherwise specified, annual license fees are
payable on July 1 of each year and shall be valid for the year ending the
following June 30. The first annual business registration certificate issued to
any person shall be issued for the unexpired period of the year of issuance,
except as otherwise provided in this article.
   (H)   Where quarterly or semi-annual fees due from any business entity total
$500 or less annually, the entire amount shall be due and payable in advance of
January 1. As to registration certificates after August 15, 1986, the entire
amount shall be due and payable annually from the date the certificate was
initially issued thereon.
   (I)   In issuing a quarterly or annual registration certificate for the
first time for a business which has previously been operated without a
registration certificate, the City Clerk shall charge the fee for the entire
current year or portion of the year during which the business was in operation,
to and including the current quarter. The City Clerk shall also charge for the
three preceding years or portions of those years during which the business was
in operation. The City Clerk shall not collect an amount exceeding the fee for
the entire current year in which the certificate is issued, plus the three
preceding years or portion of those years during which the business was
operated.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 2247, passed 11-12-1958; Ord. 3887, passed 12-
6-1979; Ord. MC-118, passed 11-16-1981; Ord. MC-194, passed 8-3-1982; Ord. MC-
287, passed 7-7-1983; Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983; Ord. MC-530, passed 7-22-
1986; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.033 REFUND OF UNUSED BUSINESS REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
   Where a certificate holder has ceased doing business, a refund of an unused
period of a business registration certificate may be granted upon the filing of
a written request to the City Clerk within a period of one year after the date
of payment of the amount sought to be refunded; provided that any refund shall
be made on only unused full quarters remaining until the end of the
registration year and shall not be made for any quarter in which the business
covered thereunder was conducted for any period of time; provided, further,
that no minimum or flat rate registration fee shall be refunded. “Quarters”
shall be determined on the basis of each three full months from the date of the
last application or renewal application. Such written request may be made only
by the person who made the payment, his or her guardian, executor,
administrator or heir. Refunds shall not be made to an assignee of the written
request. In all cases, return of the original business registration
certificate, which covers the quarter(s) for which the refund is being sought,
shall be a prerequisite to any refund.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992; Ord. MC-935, passed 4-18-1995)
§ 5.04.035 CERTIFICATE - POSTING.
   Every person, firm or corporation having a registration certificate under
the provisions of this article, and carrying on a business, show, exhibition or
game at a fixed place of business, shall keep such certificate posted and
exhibited while in force, in some conspicuous part of the place of business.
Every person having such a certificate, and not having a fixed place of
business, shall carry such certificate with him or her, at all times, while
carrying on the business, show, exhibition or game for which the same was
granted. Every person, firm or corporation having a certificate under the
provisions of this article shall produce and exhibit the same, when applying
for a renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any police officer,
or any officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect business registration
certificates.
(Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.040 CONSTITUTIONAL APPORTIONMENT.
   (A)   None of the fees provided for by this article shall be so applied as
to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the
equal protection and due process clauses of the U.S. and California
Constitutions.
   (B)   In any case where a fee is believed by a certificate holder to place
an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional
clauses, the certificate holder may apply to the City Clerk for an adjustment
of the fee. Such belief shall not excuse failure to pay the applicable fee when
due. Such application may be made before, at the time of or within six months
after payment of the prescribed fee. A certificate holder shall, by sworn
statement and supporting testimony, show his or her method of business and the
gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information
as the City Clerk may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any,
of such undue burden or violation. The City Clerk shall then conduct an
investigation, and, after having first obtained the written approval of the
City Attorney, shall fix, as the fee for the certificate holder, an amount that
is reasonable and non-discriminatory, and if the fee has already been paid,
shall order a refund of the amount over and above the fee so fixed. In fixing
the fee to be charged, the City Clerk shall have the power to base the fee upon
a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the
fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature,
so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the fee as prescribed by this
article. Should the City Clerk determine the gross receipts measure of license
fee to be proper basis, he or she may require the certificate holder to submit,
either at the time of termination of the certificate holder’s business in the
city, or at the end of each quarter, a sworn statement of the gross receipts
and pay the amount of the fee therefor; provided that no additional fee during
any one calendar year shall be required after the certificate holder shall have
paid an amount equal to the annual fee as prescribed in this article.
(Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.045 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.050 TRANSACTING BUSINESS WITHOUT REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any
business, show, exhibition or game without a registration certificate shall not
excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any fee due or unpaid at the
time of such conviction, and nothing in this article shall prevent a criminal
prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this article.
   (B)   If, and in the event of, a failure of a person, firm or corporation
conducting, managing or carrying on a business to secure a registration
certificate and pay the fee therefor as provided in this article, or in the
event that a prohibited transient merchant is discovered, then the business
inspector of the city is authorized to seize and take into his or her
possession the items to be sold and to hold the same until such fees have been
paid and a certificate duly issued and properly displayed, or in the case of a
transient merchant, to hold the same until claimed by a responsible party
against whom legal action can be taken, whereupon the inspector shall release
the items confiscated.
(Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.051 ADVERTISING.
   When any person, by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book or
newspapers, advertises, holds out or represents that he or she is in business
in the city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a
governmental agency indicating that he or she is in business in the city, and
such person fails to deny by a sworn statement under penalty of perjury given
to the City Clerk, or his or her representative, that he or she is conducting a
business in the city, after being requested to do so by the inspector, then
these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that he or she is
conducting a business in the city.
(Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.055 FEES BASED ON GROSS RECEIPTS.
   (A)   In all cases where the fee to be paid by any person, firm or
corporation is based upon the amount of receipts or sales or of business
transacted, or upon the number of persons employed or upon the number of
vehicles used, or upon the amount of the maximum admission fee charged, or upon
the number of tables used for any game, or upon the number of rooms in any
building, such person, firm or corporation shall, before obtaining a
registration certificate for his or her, their or its business, and within ten
days after the beginning of each certificate period, if such business is
established or in operation during any part of such ten days, render to the
City Clerk, for his or her guidance in ascertaining the fee to be paid by such
person, firm or corporation, a written statement sworn to before some officer
authorized to administer oaths, showing the total amount of receipts of sales
or of business transacted during the calendar year next preceding the date of
such statement, or the number of vehicles used, or the amount of the maximum
admission fee charged, or the number of tables used for any game by such
person, firm or corporation, or the number of rooms contained in such building,
at the date of such statement; provided, however, that where the quarterly fee
to be paid under any section of this article is based upon the gross annual
receipts or of business transacted, or the gross annual commission of fees
received or collected, only one such statement need be filed at the time the
first quarterly registration certificate is procured, and the fee to be paid
for the succeeding quarterly periods of the year in which such statement is
filed shall be determined by and be based upon the statement filed at the time
the first quarterly registration certificate is procured.
   (B)   No such statement shall be conclusive upon the city or upon any
officer thereof as to the matter thereon set forth, and the same shall not
prejudice the right of the city to recover any amount that may be ascertained
to be due from such person, firm or corporation in addition to the amount shown
by such statement to be due in case such statement should be found to be
incorrect. If any person, firm or corporation required to make any such
statement fails to do so, such person, firm or corporation shall pay a fee at
the maximum rate prescribed in this article for the business, show, exhibition
or game carried on by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be guilty of
a violation of this article and be punishable therefor as hereinafter provided;
provided, however, that in any case where the first business registration
certificate is to be issued for a newly established business, no statement need
to be made, at the time such first certificate is issued, of the amount or
receipts of sales or business transacted and the minimum rate prescribed in
this article shall be paid at the time such first certificate is issued for any
such newly established business, the fee for which is regulated by the amount
of receipts or sales or the business transacted. At the end of the year during
which the operation of such business is commenced, the fee for the preceding
period shall be ascertained and paid. The amount of such fee shall be
ascertained by dividing the amount of the gross sales or receipts of such
business by the number of days during which such certificate has been in force
and multiplying the result by 365 and applying such result to the rate
applicable thereto to determine the fee and from this amount deduct the amount
previously paid. Such gross receipts so determined shall be the basis of the
fee for the next succeeding year.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.060 GROSS RECEIPTS - DEFINED.
   GROSS RECEIPTS, as used in this article, except as otherwise specifically
provided, means the total amount of revenue received as the sale prices of all
sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any
action, service or employment of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge
is made or credit allowed, when such service, act or employment is done as a
part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares and
merchandise, or the performance of services; GROSS RECEIPTS includes all
receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, and any amount for
which a credit is allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any deduction
therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable or losses or
other expenses whatsoever; GROSS RECEIPTS further includes commissions received
for the sale of real property and the annual gross receipts, fees or
commissions of every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing, carrying
on or engaged in any business or profession of any nature whatsoever, including
the providing of services relating thereto; but GROSS RECEIPTS does not include
cash discounts allowed and taken on sales and any sales tax paid to the state,
a municipality or public entity.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3245, passed 3-8-1972; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-
7-1992)
§ 5.04.063 GROSS - WORK OUTSIDE CITY.
   If a person owns, leases, occupies or otherwise maintains within the city a
place or premises from which he or she engages in business activities outside
the city, he or she shall include a portion of the gross receipts from work
performed outside the city in the measure of the fee. In the absence of
substantial information to the contrary, 20% of gross receipts from work
performed outside the city shall be deemed to be that portion subject to the
fee as attributable to business engaged in within the city:
   (A)   Require the use of a greater percentage of such gross receipts,
stating in writing to the certificate holder his or her reasons therefor; or
   (B)   Approve the use of a lesser percentage of such gross receipts, based
upon proof presented to him or her in writing by the taxpayer that the 20%
factor is inequitable. Any such variation from the 20% factor established in
this provision shall be approved in writing by the City Clerk, or his or her
authorized representative. Where there are no measurable gross receipts
directly attributable to operations carried on from a place of business within
the city, such operations shall be deemed to produce gross receipts in an
amount at least equal to the cost of maintaining such operations, such cost of
operations shall include, but not be limited to, rent and/or depreciation,
salaries and wages, fixed charges and other expenses.
(Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.065 GROSS RECEIPTS - BUSINESS YOUNGER THAN SIX MONTHS.
   When a fee based upon the gross receipts of a business in existence less
than six months during the preceding year was computed upon anticipated gross
receipts which exceeded the actual gross receipts of the subject year
immediately following such period of six months or less of such preceding year,
the City Clerk, subject to the filing of a written request during the first
quarter of the subsequent year, shall give a credit for or authorize a rebate
of the amount such fee exceeded the actual gross receipts of the business as
determined by the City Clerk. The privilege of a credit or a rebate shall not
apply to any subsequent year, and the decision of the City Clerk shall be final
and conclusive.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 2809, passed 3-28-1967; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-
7-1992)
§ 5.04.070 EXAMINATION, AUDIT AND INSPECTION OF FINANCIAL BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   The City Clerk, and his or her authorized personnel, inspectors and
police officers are authorized to examine, audit and inspect any financial
books and records of any certificate holder, applicant for a registration
certificate or person engaged in business, as may be necessary to verify or
ascertain the amount of the fee due from such certificate holder, applicant or
person in the specific classification.
   (B)   All certificate holders, applicants for registration certificates and
persons engaged in business are required to permit such an examination of their
financial books and records for the purposes and under conditions aforesaid.
Any failure or refusal to permit such an examination by a certificate holder
shall constitute good cause revocation of the subject registration certificate
issued under this article, which penalty shall be accumulative and in addition
to any other penalty or remedy provided for by law, whether criminal or civil
in nature.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3268, passed 5-17-1972; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-
7-1992)
§ 5.04.071 FAILURE TO FILE STATEMENT.
   If a person, business or corporation fails to file any required statement
within the time prescribed, or if, after reasonable notice therefor made by the
City Clerk, fails to file a corrected statement, the City Clerk, or a
designated representative, may determine the amount of the fee due from such
person, business or corporation by means of such information as he or she may
be able to obtain. If such a determination is made, the City Clerk shall issue
a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or depositing it
with the United States Postal Service, postage prepaid, addressed to the
person, business or corporation so assessed at his or her last known address.
Such party may, within 15 days after the mailing or serving of such notice,
appeal such determination to the City Council. The City Council shall consider
and act upon the appeal in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 2.64, except that the time limit provisions of §
2.64.040 shall not apply.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3949, passed 7-9-1980; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-
7-1992)
§ 5.04.075 PENALTIES FOR DELINQUENCIES.
   (A)   The times of delinquency and penalties assessed therefor for all
registration certificates covered by this title shall be determined by the
provisions of this section.
   (B)   Payments for the respective registration certificates as set forth in
this title which are not made on or before, or which are received in the City
Clerk’s office after, the following applicable delinquent dates, or which bear
a postmark after said dates, shall be deemed delinquent and therefore subject
to the following penalty assessments:
      (1)   Monthly registration certificates: the tenth day of every month for
which the license is due;
      (2)   Quarterly registration certificates: the last day of the first
month of the quarter for which such fee is due: January 31, April 30, July 31
and October 30. Delinquent dates for registration certificates first issued
after August 15, 1986 are 30 days from the date the fees are due and payable;
and
      (3)   Semi-annual or annual registration certificates: the last day of
the first month in which such fee is due by its terms.
   (C)   For failure to obtain a registration certificate on or before the
start of business, or for failure to pay a fee on or before the delinquency
date, there is imposed a penalty of 50% of the fee. An additional penalty of
50% of the fee shall be imposed after 60 days of delinquency; such penalty
shall be added to the fee and other penalties due.
   (D)   If a business fails to obtain a business registration certificate or
renew a certificate and has been delinquent for 90 days, an assessment of 10%
of the amount of the fee and penalties per month not to exceed 100% shall be
added hereto in addition to the penalties stated in division (C) above. The
assessment stated in this division (D) shall be instituted to cover escalating
costs incurred to pursue delinquent accounts requiring extended enforcement
action.
   (E)   It shall be the responsibility of each business owner to obtain and
pay for a renewal registration certificate regardless of whether or not such
business owner has received a renewal notice from the city. Any failure to
receive such notice, for any reason, shall not affect the applicability of
penalties of non-payment or late payment.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3581, passed 6-21-1976; Ord. MC-295, passed 8-
3-1983; Ord. MC-530, passed 7-22-1986; Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-
817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.076 ASSESSMENTS; DELINQUENT REGISTRATIONS; LIENS.
   (A)   Whenever delinquent business registration fees and appropriate
penalties cannot be collected after proper notification to the property/
business owner, the total uncollected amount, including penalties and
administrative fees, shall become assessments, and the City Clerk, or his or
her duly authorized representative, shall compile a list of such assessments
together with parcel number designations and addresses upon which the
assessments are being fixed.
   (B)   After notice and hearing, and upon confirmation of the imposition of
the liens by resolution of the Mayor and City Council, the City Clerk shall
file a certified copy of the approved resolution with the County Auditor,
directing that all unpaid business registration fees, penalties and
administrative fees be entered as lien charges against said property as it
appears on the current assessment rolls. Liens will be collected at the same
time and in the same manner, subject to the same penalties and interest upon
delinquencies, as the general taxes for the city are collected. The City Clerk
shall present for recording appropriate notices of the imposition of these
liens with the County Recorder.
(Ord. MC-756, passed 11-21-1990)
§ 5.04.085 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   The amount or rate of fees to be paid to the city by any person, firm or
corporation, or association engaged in or carrying on any business, show,
exhibition or game designated in this article is fixed and established as
provided in this article, and such fee shall be paid by every person, firm or
corporation or association engaged in carrying on any such business, show,
exhibition or game in the city.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.090 LIQUOR OR INTOXICATING LIQUOR DEFINED.
   LIQUOR or INTOXICATING LIQUOR, as used in this article, means beer, wines,
gin, whiskey, cordials or rum, and every liquor or solid, patented or not,
containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume, and which are fit for use for
beverage purposes.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 1525, passed 1-8-1934; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-
7-1992)
§ 5.04.095 REAL ESTATE BUSINESS.
   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on
the business of examining, searching or investigating titles to real estate and
issuing abstracts, statements or certificates, showing or purporting to show or
certify to the condition or state of the title to any particular property or
properties as disclosed by an examination of the public records, but which
abstracts, statement or certificate does not ensure the title to real property
or any interest therein; the fee shall be established by resolution of the
Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.100 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-935, passed 4-18-1995)
§ 5.04.110 ADVERTISING - DISTRIBUTING SAMPLES, HANDBILLS OR DODGERS.
   (A)   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on the business of distributing advertising samples, handbills, dodgers or
printed advertisements of any kind, the fee shall be set by resolution of the
Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the expression CARRYING ON THE
BUSINESS is defined to be and is construed to mean the doing of any act or
series of acts, of distributing or advertising by any means or in any manner
specified in this section.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed
1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.115 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-84)
§ 5.04.120 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.123 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.04.125 AUCTIONS.
   (A)   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on or engaged in the business of selling at auction goods, wares and
merchandise, the fee shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council.
   (B)   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on or engaged in the business of selling at auction goods, wares or
merchandise, for five or fewer months in a year the fee shall be established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (C)   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on or engaging in the business of selling at auction real estate, the fee shall
be established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 1729, passed 11-30-1944; Ord. MC-302, passed
9-7-1983; Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.130 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.135 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.04.140 BILLIARD OR POOLROOM.
   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on
any public billiard or poolroom, the fee shall be established by resolution of
the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 1489, passed 3-8-1932; Ord. MC-744, passed 10-
8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.145 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.04.150 VENDING MACHINE SALES AND AUTOMATIC WEIGHING DEVICES.
   Every person, firm or corporation operating, maintaining, leasing, letting,
managing or carrying on the business of selling or vending goods, wares or
merchandise by means of vending machine or managing or carrying on the business
of operating or maintaining clothes washing machines, automatic scale weighing
devices or coin-in-the-slot weighing machines shall pay a fee established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 2227, passed 7-1-1958; Ord. MC-382, passed 6-
20-1984; Ord. MC-548, passed 10-22-1986; Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord.
MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.155 BOWLING ALLEY.
   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on a
public bowling alley, the fee shall be established by resolution of the Mayor
and City Council.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 1489, passed 3-8-1932; Ord. MC-302, passed 9-
7-1983; Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.160 TEMPORARY BOXING, WRESTLING OR ATHLETIC EXHIBITION.
   Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on a
temporary boxing, wrestling or other athletic exhibition or contest shall pay a
fee established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 1800, passed 9-22-1947; Ord. MC-302, passed 9-
7-1983; Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.165 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.04.170 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.175 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-522, passed 5-20-1986)
§ 5.04.180 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.185 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.190 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.195 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.200 COMMISSION MERCHANT OR BROKER - BROKER FOR STOCKS OR BONDS.
   (A)   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on the business of a commission merchant or broker, or stock and bond broker,
or buying, selling or otherwise dealing in stocks or bonds, or evidences of
indebtedness of public or private persons or of incorporated entities, the fee
shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   For the purpose of this article, COMMISSION MERCHANT OR BROKER is
defined to be the business of buying or selling meats, provisions, produce,
food products, goods, wares or merchandise, drugs or medicines, jewelry or
precious metals or other tangible property, as a broker or agent, for the owner
or consignee thereof for a fee or commission, whether or not the operation of
such business customarily includes the actual possession, custody or control of
goods, wares or merchandise.
   (C)   For the purpose of this article, STOCK AND BOND BROKER is defined to
be the business of buying or selling federal, state, county or municipal stocks
or bonds, or stocks or bonds of partnerships or incorporated entities, or
evidences of indebtedness of private persons, partnerships or of incorporated
entities, for a fee or commission.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 1729, passed 11-30-1944; Ord. MC-302, passed
9-7-1983; Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.205 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 5.04.210 RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL CLEANING.
   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on
the business of carpet cleaning, swimming pool cleaning, cleaning buildings,
parking areas, rooms or furnishings, by compressed air, power sweeper or vacuum
cleaner, by means of any machine drawn, hauled, carried or propelled by hand
power, or any janitorial related services conducted in residential or
commercial structures or parking areas, the fee shall be established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 1851, passed 4-5-1949; Ord. MC-382, passed 6-
20-1984; Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.215 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-339, passed 2-14-1984)
§ 5.04.220 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.04.225 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.235 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.240 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.245 EXHIBITIONS IN THEATERS OR TEMPORARY PLACES.
   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on
the business of seminar, sale, exhibition, show or other business activities of
a temporary nature in public rooms, in hotel/motel meeting rooms, convention
facilities or other temporary places not otherwise specifically provided for in
this chapter, the fee shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 1800, passed 9-22-1947; Ord. MC-744, passed
10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.250 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.255 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.260 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.265 FIRE SALE, BANKRUPT OR WRECK SALE.
   (A)   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on a fire sale, bankrupt or wreck sale, the fee shall be established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   For the purposes of this article, a FIRE, BANKRUPT or WRECK SALE is
defined to be and includes the sale of goods, wares or merchandise salvaged
from a fire, wreck or other calamity, or a sale of goods, wares or merchandise
advertised as a fire or bankrupt or wreck sale; providing that no registration
certificate shall be required under the provisions of this section for sale of
merchandise salvaged from any fire, wreck or other calamity occurring in the
city.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
Cross-reference:
   See also
Chapter 5.16 for additional provisions on fire, removal or closing-out sales
§ 5.04.270 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.04.275 GAME TABLES, MACHINES OR DEVICES.
   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on
the business of operating or maintaining tables, machines or devices offered
for use, used, operated or played as a game, or as a test of skill, or for
amusement, for the operation of which a charge is made, or which is conducted
for profit (except such tables, machines or devices otherwise specifically
provided for in this chapter), the fee shall be established by resolution of
the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.280 HOBBY HORSE MACHINES.
   (A)   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on the business of operating or maintaining a hobby horse or similar device for
the amusement of children, offered for use, used or operated for the amusement
or entertainment of children, or a shuffleboard, for the operation of which a
charge is made, or which is conducted for profit, the fee shall be established
by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   If, in the event of a failure of the person, firm or corporation so
operating or maintaining such machine or device to secure a registration
certificate and pay the fee therefor, as provided in this section, or in the
event that the certificate is not publicly displayed at a place open to the
examination of the inspector, then the City Chief of Police is authorized to
seize and take into his or her possession the machine or device and to hold the
same until such fee has been paid and a certificate duly issued and properly
displayed covering the machine, whereupon the Chief of Police shall release the
machine or shuffleboard, upon payment to the city the sum of $25 per machine,
which sum shall be in addition to the amount of any certificate fee.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.285 MUSIC TABLES, MACHINES OR DEVICES.
   (A)   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on the business of operating or maintaining tables, machines or devices for the
playing or rendering of music, for the operation of which a charge is made or
which is conducted for profit, other than sound trucks and other advertising
mediums, the fee shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council.
   (B)   If the person, firm or corporation mentioned in this section fails or
neglects to pay the fee required in this section and secure a registration
certificate for any of the machines or devices mentioned in this section, or if
the certificate is not publicly displayed in a place on the premises open to
the city business inspector, then the Chief of Police is authorized to seize
and take into his or her possession any such machine and to hold it until such
fee has been paid and a certificate duly issued therefor and properly
displayed. The Chief of Police shall release any such machine upon payment to
the city for such release the sum of $25 per machine, which shall be in
addition to the registration certificate fee.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.290 NOTICE TO CITY CLERK OF TABLE LOCATIONS.
   Upon the issuance of any certificate, under the provisions of §§
5.04.275,
5.04.280 and/or
5.04.285, the applicant therefor shall notify the City Clerk of the location of
each table, machine, device or game, and in the event of any change in such
location, then the certificate holder shall notify the City Clerk or the city
business inspector of such change.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.295 COIN-OPERATED GAME MACHINES.
   (A)   For every person or firm or corporation conducting, managing or
carrying on the business of operating or maintaining coin-operated game
machines, including a certificate holder owning and maintaining one or more
coin-operated game machines as an incidental business operation at any place of
business, the fee shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council.
   (B)   A COIN-OPERATED GAME MACHINE means any machine, device or apparatus
which is used as game or contest of any description or for amusement, or which
may be used for any such game or contest or for amusement and the operation or
use of which is permitted, controlled or made possible by the deposit or
placing of any coin, plate, disc, slug or key into any slot, crevice or other
opening, or by the payment of any fee or fees in lieu thereof, except a
machine, device or apparatus specifically otherwise provided for in this
article.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.300 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.305 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.310 DOG KENNEL.
   For every person conducting, managing or carrying on a dog kennel business
where dogs are boarded or bred for sale, the license shall be based upon gross
receipts in accordance with the schedule adopted by resolution of the Mayor and
City Council pursuant to §
5.04.525(F). This section shall not be applicable to a kennel with three or
less dogs and shall not apply to veterinarians.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.315 JUNK DEALER.
   (A)   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on the business of junk dealer, the fee shall be established by resolution of
the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   For the purpose of this article, JUNK DEALER is defined to be any
person, firm or corporation having a business of buying or selling, either at
wholesale or retail, any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metals or
other articles of junk.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.320 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.04.325 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.04.330 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.04.335 MASSAGE PARLOR.
   Every person, firm, association or corporation conducting, managing or
carrying on the business of a massage parlor, the fee shall be established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
Cross-reference:
   For additional regulations on massage parlors, see
Chapter 5.20
§ 5.04.340 MESSENGER SERVICE.
   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on
the business of furnishing messengers or messenger service, the fee shall be
established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984; Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817,
passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.345 PRIVATE PATROL SYSTEM, ARMORED CAR SERVICE AND PRIVATE POLICE
SYSTEM.
   (A)   As a condition to the issuance of a business registration certificate
for a private patrol system or armored car service, the applicant must possess
any and all state licenses necessary to engage in the business covered by the
business registration certificate application, and a copy of the applicant’s
state license or licenses shall be filed with the City Clerk prior to issuance
of a city business registration certificate.
   (B)   All employees and persons who will perform services under the
certificate must possess a valid State Department of Consumer Affairs Bureau of
Collection and Investigative Services Registration card, on the front of which
is endorsed one of the following: responding guard or permit for exposed
firearm. Each certificate holder shall ensure that a copy of each such valid
card is filed with the City Clerk.
   (C)   No registration certificate issued under this section may be
transferred at any time.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.350 PAWNBROKER.
   (A)   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on the business of a pawnbroker, the fee shall be established by resolution of
the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   For the purpose of this article, PAWNBROKER means and includes every
person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of loaning money either
for himself or herself or for any other person, firm or corporation, upon any
personal property, personal security or purchasing personal property and
reselling or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendor or other assignees
at prices previously agreed upon.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed or construed to
apply to the loaning of money or personal property or personal security by any
bank authorized so to do under laws of the state.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.355 FORTUNE TELLING.
   (A)   Fortune telling defined. For the purposes of this section, FORTUNE
TELLING means the practice of the art of astrology, palmistry, phrenology, life
reading, fortune telling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal-
gazing, mediumship, spirit augury, divination, necromancy, character reading or
fortune telling by handwriting analysis or other similar business or art,
whether predicted by manual or electronic device, and demand or receive
directly or indirectly a fee, gift, donation or reward for the exercise or
exhibition.
   (B)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any individual or person to
conduct or carry on any fortune telling business or activity without first
having applied for and received a business permit as set forth in
Chapter 5.82.
   (C)   Business registration certificate required - fee. A business
registration certificate application shall be made and a fee as established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council shall be paid in accordance with this
code. The fee shall be due on January 1 of each year and must be paid by
January 31 of each year.
   (D)   Religious exemptions. Church or recognized religious organizations
shall be exempt from permit and business registration certificate regulations
of this chapter; provided that the generated revenue is for the exclusive
benefit of the church, all revenue will be deposited directly to the church
treasury, no single person will benefit from the generated revenue and that the
church has maintained head quarters or a place of worship in the city for at
least one year preceding the date on which the activity shall be initiated.
Proof of religious exemption shall be furnished to the City Clerk in the form
of a determination letter from the United States Treasury (Internal Revenue
Service) relating to federal taxes or a determination letter from the State
Franchise Tax Board relating to franchise taxes.
(Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817,
passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.360 SOLICITING, SELLING, ADVERTISING AND BEGGING.
   [This section shall become inoperative as of the date Ord. MC-1186 becomes
operative and shall remain inoperative so long as
Chapter 9.60 prohibiting aggressive solicitation remains in full force and
effect. Should
Chapter 9.60 be stricken, enjoined or suspended by any court of law, this
section will automatically be reenacted.]
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992; Ord. MC-937, passed 5-1-1995; Ord. MC-1186,
passed 10-5-2004)
§ 5.04.365 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.370 SELLER FROM BOOTH OR STAND - PEDDLER, FLAGS, BANNERS, BALLOONS,
TOYS, FOOD AND CONFECTIONS.
   For every person, firm or corporation engaged in conjunction with a carnival
or similar activity to carrying on the business of a seller from a booth or
stand, or a peddler who sells or offers for sale flags, banners, balloons,
canes, horns, trumpets, musical or noise-making instruments of any kind, toys,
badges, buttons, shoestrings, hairpins, lead pencils, combs, similar trinkets
and items, souvenirs of any kind, hot dogs, hamburgers, tacos, burritos, soft
drinks, ice cream, ice milk, popcorn, cotton candy, candy apples, snow cones
and any similar food or confection, or any combination thereof, the fee shall
be established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council. It shall be
unlawful to engage in the carrying on of the business listed in this section
other than in conjunction with a carnival or similar activity, or as permitted
pursuant to Chapter 19.70. A person with a business registration certificate to
sell ice cream or ice milk products from a vehicle or a cart under §
5.04.375 shall be exempt from the fees imposed in this section.
(Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-744,
passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992; Ord. MC-1363, passed 8-2-2011)
§ 5.04.375 PEDDLER OR SOLICITOR - FOODSTUFFS.
   (A)   For every person, firm or corporation engaged in or carrying on the
business of a peddler, or solicitor of orders, or for the sampling, or for the
sale of any fish, fruits, vegetables, butter, eggs, buttermilk, milk, ice
cream, confection, bread, crackers, cookies, pies, cakes, pastries, doughnuts
or other bakery goods, or any other edibles, intended for use as food for human
consumption, by means of foot or vehicle delivery, the fee shall be established
by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, a PEDDLER or SOLICITOR is defined to
be and include every person, firm or corporation who goes from place to place
on a fixed route, who solicits orders for the sale of or who sells or offers
for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, or the sampling of goods, wares or
merchandise, as enumerated or contemplated in this section, which he, she or it
has in his, her or its possession, or in his, her or its motortruck,
automobile, wagon or other vehicle, cart, basket, tray or other container.
(Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983; Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984; Ord. MC-744,
passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.380 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.385 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES.
   Christmas tree sales shall be held from November 1 through December 31 only.
The fee therefor shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council and shall not be prorated.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.390 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.395 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.400 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.405 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.410 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.415 CESSPOOL PUMPING, COLLECTION OF RUBBISH AND WASTE MATERIAL.
   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on
the business of operating or driving any vehicle used for the purpose of
pumping cesspools or removing or collecting rubbish, manure, waste material or
refuse matter of any kind, the fee shall be established by resolution of the
Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.420 COLLECTION AGENCY.
   (A)   Fee. For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or
carrying on the business of a collection agency, the fee shall be established
by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   Collection agency defined. As used in this section, the term
COLLECTION AGENCY means and includes all persons, firms, corporations and
voluntary associations engaging, directly or indirectly, as a primary or
secondary object, business or pursuit, in soliciting claims for collection, and
in the collection of claims owing or due or asserted to be owing or due to
another, and any person, firm or corporation or voluntary association engaged
in collecting accounts for another, whether the employment is for one or more
persons, firms, corporations or voluntary associations, or in the selling or
furnishing of any collection system or collection letter forms or collection
letters, or any house agency, firm, person, corporation or voluntary
association using a fictitious name in collecting its own accounts receivable
with the intention of conveying to the debtor that a third party has been
employed to collect such accounts.
   (C)   Attorney conducting collection agency. Any attorney at law who,
directly or indirectly, by the use of agents, representatives, fictitious names
or otherwise, solicits claims or accounts for collection, or who solicits or
demands payment of claims from debtors through or by the use of laypeople,
employees or agents, or the use of fictitious names; or any attorney at law who
makes a practice of accepting assignments to himself or herself, or to any
agent, employee or fictitious name, of claims or accounts for collection, shall
be deemed to be conducting a collection agency. COLLECTION AGENCY includes all
attorneys at law who are in fact conducting collection agencies whether
included in the foregoing definition or not.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.425 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.430 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.445 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.450 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.455 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.04.460 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.465 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.470 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.475 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.480 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.485 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.490 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.04.495 TRANSIENT MERCHANTS/VENDORS AND TEMPORARY BUSINESSES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to offer for sale,
trade or barter; to create; to possess items to be sold, traded or bartered; or
to sell, trade or barter any items, including, but not limited to, manufactured
items, homemade items, packaged and unpackaged goods, commodities, food,
agricultural products, vehicles, furniture or any other item or to offer any
service, from a temporary stand, or other temporary location, upon any public
street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, easement or other public place, doorway
of any room or building, unenclosed building, building for which no certificate
of occupancy has been issued, vacant lot, front or side yard, back yard (except
as permitted in
Chapter 5.68), driveway, parking lot or parcel of land, either paved or
unpaved, at any time except as permitted pursuant to Chapter 19.70.
   (B)   Possession of a valid city business registration certificate or permit
issued under any section of
Chapter 5.04 is not a defense to division (A) above if the transient merchant/
vendor stays at any location not listed on his or her business registration
certificate or permit for more than five minutes in a 24-hour period.
   (C)   This section is intended to make it unlawful for any person or persons
to offer, create, possess items to sell or commence to sell items at locations
that have not been approved by the city, and to prohibit transient merchants/
vendors and temporary businesses. The Mayor and City Council find that
transient merchants/vendors and temporary businesses at temporary locations
cause blight; they unlawfully compete against lawful businesses without paying
permit fees or taxes; they encourage people to unlawfully assemble; they
threaten the public health and safety, public sanitation and the public
welfare; and they create a public nuisance.
   (D)   This section applies to all transient merchants/vendors, regardless of
their employer or purpose.
(Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992; Ord. MC-1189,
passed 10-19-2004; Ord. MC-1363, passed 8-2-2011)
§ 5.04.496 PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITY FOR TRANSIENT MERCHANTS/VENDORS AND
TEMPORARY BUSINESSES.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant and/or person in control or
charge of any real or personal property to authorize another to engage in or to
allow any of the activities prohibited in §
5.04.495 on that property.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992; Ord. MC-1189, passed 10-19-2004)
§ 5.04.497 SEIZURE; HEARING.
   (A)   In addition to any criminal action which may be taken, any authorized
officer may seize the items offered for sale contrary to §§
5.04.495 and
5.04.496 and hold said items pending a hearing before the City Clerk, or his or
her designee. Said hearing must be held within 30 days following the giving of
notice of such seizure to the seller. If the seller is unavailable or unknown,
notice of the hearing may be posted at the location where the items were
offered for sale.
   (B)   At the hearing, the City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall
determine whether a business registration certificate pursuant to this chapter
has been issued. If he or she determines that such certificate has not been
issued, he or she may destroy or otherwise dispose of the items or may return
such items to the seller upon the payment of all costs of the seizure and
hearing by the seller. If there is a dispute over the value of the seized
items, between the seizing officer and the seller, the City Clerk, or his or
her designee, shall make a determination of the value of the seized items based
upon the evidence presented at the hearing.
   (C)   If the seized items have a value greater than $100, the seller may
appeal the decision of the City Clerk, or his or her designee, to the City
Council pursuant to
Chapter 2.64. For seized items that have a value of $100 or less, the decision
of the City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall be final.
   (D)   If the items seized are evidence in a criminal proceeding, they shall
not be returned or destroyed pending release by the appropriate authorities. If
the items seized are perishable, the city may donate the property to any bona
fide charitable organization provided that said donation is in conformance with
the requirements of the Cal. Health and Safety Code, as interpreted by the
County Department of Public Health, or the city may otherwise dispose of the
perishable items. If the seller waives his or her right to a hearing pursuant
to this section, then the goods may be immediately destroyed or otherwise
disposed of by the city. If the seller, or his or her agent, does not appear
for the hearing provided for in this section, the items shall be deemed
abandoned and may immediately be disposed of as other surplus city property.
Any animals seized pursuant to this section shall be impounded or returned
pursuant to Title 6.
   (E)   As used in this section, OFFICER or AUTHORIZED OFFICER shall mean any
police officer of the city, any of the officers specified in §
9.90.010(A)(7) with regard to animals and any of the officers specified in §§
9.90.010(A)(5),
9.90.010(A)(6) and
9.90.010(A)(8).
   (F)   Pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, § 1094.6, any action to
review the decision of the City Clerk, or his or her designee, or the City
Council shall be commenced no later than the ninetieth day after the date said
decision is adopted.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992; Ord. MC-1141, passed 4-22-2004)
§ 5.04.498 PENALTY.
   Violation of §§
5.04.495 and
5.04.496 shall be a misdemeanor. This section is in emphasis of §
1.12.010(A) and not in contradiction thereof. Stating the penalty for the
violation of these sections shall not be construed as affecting the penalties
for any other provision of this code.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.499 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of §§
5.04.495,
5.04.496,
5.04.497 or
5.04.498 is determined by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by any
federal or state agency having jurisdiction over its subject matter, to be
invalid or in conflict with any paramount federal or state law or regulation
now or hereafter in effect, or is determined by that court or agency to require
modification in order to conform to the requirements of that paramount law or
regulation, then that provision will be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent part of this chapter, and such determination will not affect the
validity and enforceability of any other provisions.
(Ord. MC-1189, passed 10-19-2004)
§ 5.04.500 SWAP MEET.
   (A)   For every person, firm or corporation operating, conducting and/or
managing a swap meet in the city, the fee is established by resolution of the
Mayor and City Council, pursuant to §
5.04.525(F).
   (B)   For every dealer or individual selling or offering for sale goods,
wares, merchandise or things or articles of value at a swap meet in the city,
the fee is established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council, pursuant to
§
5.04.525(B).
   (C)   For every dealer or individual selling or offering for sale food for
human or animal consumption at a swap meet in the city, the fee is established
by resolution of the Mayor and City Council, pursuant to §
5.04.525(C).
   (D)   SWAP MEET, as used in this article, means any business wherein any
person, firm or corporation or agent thereof rents spaces to various dealers or
individuals for selling or offering for sale goods, wares, merchandise or
things or articles of value, or food for human or animal consumption, whether
or not an admission fee is charged to enter the area when such items are sold
or being offered for sale.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992; Ord. MC-1094,
passed 3-21-2001)
§ 5.04.504 TELEPHONE SOLICITATION; TELEMARKETING.
   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing, carrying on or
engaging in the business of telephone solicitation, telemarketing or other
similar activities, the fee shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and
City Council.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.505 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1414, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 5.04.507 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1414, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 5.04.510 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.515 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.520 VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   (A)   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on the business of running, driving or operating any automobile or motor-
propelled vehicle for the transportation of passengers for hire, when driven by
the owner or a representative of the owner, or by the person or persons hiring
or renting the same, at rate per mile, per trip, per hour, per day, per week or
per month, and such vehicle is routed under the direction of such passenger or
passengers or of such persons hiring the same, the fee shall be established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   For every person driving or operating a taxicab, the fee shall be
established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.525 FEES BASED ON GROSS RECEIPTS.
   (A)   Professional services. Every person, firm or corporation conducting,
managing or carrying on or engaged in any of the businesses hereinafter
enumerated in this division (A) and not specifically covered elsewhere in this
chapter shall pay a fee established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council. The fee provided for in this section shall be paid by every person,
firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on or engaged in any
professional service, business, profession or occupation, which shall include,
but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Architect;
      (2)   Assayer;
      (3)   Attorney at law;
      (4)   Auditor accountant;
      (5)   Bookkeeper;
      (6)   Chemist;
      (7)   Chiropodist;
      (8)   Chiropractor;
      (9)   Civil, electrical, chemical or mechanical engineer;
      (10)   Consultant (one who gives professional advice or services);
      (11)   Dentist;
      (12)   Drafting;
      (13)   Employment agency;
      (14)   Marriage or family counselor;
      (15)   Optician;
      (16)   Optometrist;
      (17)   Occultist;
      (18)   Osteopath or osteopathist;
      (19)   Physical therapist;
      (20)   Physician;
      (21)   Real estate broker;
      (22)   Surgeon;
      (23)   Undertaker, embalmer or funeral director;
      (24)   Teacher of private dancing school of more than 12 pupils; and
      (25)   Every person carrying on or engaged in the business of treating,
caring, administering to or giving treatments to the sick, wounded or infirm
for the purpose of bringing about their recovery, by any method or pursuant to
any belief, doctrine or system other than those hereinabove specifically named,
and charging fee or compensation therefor. Nothing contained in this section
shall be deemed or be construed as applying to any person engaged in any of the
businesses hereinbefore enumerated, solely as an employee of any other person,
firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on any such business in
the city.
   (B)   Retail merchants (other than food).
      (1)   Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on the business of selling at retail any goods, services, wares or merchandise
other than food which are not otherwise specifically covered by other sections
of this chapter shall pay a fee established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council.
      (2)   “Retail merchants (other than food),” for purposes of this division
(B), shall include, but not be limited to, the following businesses:
         (a)   Advertising - bill posting or sign boards;
         (b)   Alarm businesses;
         (c)   Alterations;
         (d)   Ambulance service;
         (e)   Antiques;
         (f)   Armored car service;
         (g)   Art studio or gallery;
         (h)   Athletic exhibitions;
         (i)   Barber and beauty supply;
         (j)   Bicycles;
         (k)   Boat sales and service;
         (l)   Book store;
         (m)   Building material sales;
         (n)   Camper sales;
         (o)   Carpet sales;
         (p)   Check cashing;
         (q)   Cleaning or dyeing establishments;
         (r)   Clothing stores;
         (s)   Cold storage locker rentals;
         (t)   Cosmetic sales;
         (u)   Data processing services;
         (v)   Detective agency;
         (w)   Dog grooming;
         (x)   Drug store;
         (y)   Electrical appliance sales and service;
         (z)   Electrical sign enterprises;
         (aa)   Equipment rental;
         (bb)   Film processing;
         (cc)   Florists;
         (dd)   Furniture store;
         (ee)   General merchandise sales;
         (ff)   Gift shop;
         (gg)   Graphic arts;
         (hh)   Guard service;
         (ii)   Hardware store;
         (jj)   Interior decorating;
         (kk)   Jewelry store;
         (ll)   Linen, uniform supply services and laundries;
         (mm)   Medical equipment sales and service;
         (nn)   Mobile home sales;
         (oo)   Music store;
         (pp)   Nursery (plants);
         (qq)   Paint store;
         (rr)   Pest control service;
         (ss)   Pet store;
         (tt)   Photographers;
         (uu)   Physical culture and health clubs;
         (vv)   Private post office service;
         (ww)   Record shop;
         (xx)   Recycling service;
         (yy)   Repair shops (general);
         (zz)   Roller rink;
         (aaa)   Seasonal athletic events;
         (bbb)   Shoe repair shop;
         (ccc)   Shoe shining or polishing stand;
         (ddd)   Shoe store;
         (eee)   Sporting goods;
         (fff)   Stock car racing;
         (ggg)   Swimming pool supplies and equipment;
         (hhh)   Tanning salon;
         (iii)   Trade school;
         (jjj)   Travel agency;
         (kkk)   Vehicle leasing;
         (lll)   Vehicle repair shop;
         (mmm)   Vehicle wrecking; and
         (nnn)   Welding shop.
   (C)   Retail food merchants.
      (1)   Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on a business consisting principally of selling at retail food for human or
animal consumption not otherwise specifically covered by other sections of this
chapter shall pay a fee established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council.
      (2)   “Retail food merchants,” for purposes of this division (C), shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   Bakery;
         (b)   Confectioners;
         (c)   Dairy;
         (d)   Delicatessen;
         (e)   Feed store;
         (f)   Grocery store;
         (g)   Health food store;
         (h)   Meat market;
         (i)   Produce store;
         (j)   Restaurant; and
         (k)   Retail liquor.
   (D)   Wholesale sales and telephone companies. Every person, firm or
corporation conducting, carrying on or managing a business consisting
principally of operating a telephone company; selling goods, wares or
merchandise at wholesale, other than manufacturing and selling goods at
wholesale; selling at wholesale hydro carbon, lubricating oil or gasoline; and
not otherwise specifically covered by other provisions of this chapter, shall
pay a fee established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (E)   Manufacturers/wholesalers. Every person, firm or corporation
manufacturing and selling any goods, wares, merchandise or services at
wholesale, and not otherwise specifically covered by other provisions of this
chapter shall pay a fee established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council. Temporary employment services shall be included within this division
(E).
   (F)   Commercial, industrial and residential rental or leasing.
      (1)   Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on the business of leasing or renting commercial or industrial building(s),
land or space(s), where the building(s), land or space(s) are to be utilized
for any business purpose, including retail sales, offices and suites or other
business rentals including mini-storage; or freight forwarding storehouse(s)
and warehouse(s); or operating hotel(s), rooming house(s), lodging house(s),
boardinghouse(s), apartment house(s), court motel(s), mobile home park(s); or
leasing or renting any residential dwelling unit(s), including single-family
home(s), shall obtain a business registration certificate and pay a fee
established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
      (2)   (a)   All businesses which conduct, manage or carry on the business
of leasing or renting of commercial or industrial building(s), land or space
(s), which are to be utilized for any business purpose, are required to furnish
a list of tenants or lessees for all such buildings to the City Clerk.
         (b)   The list of tenants shall be included with the business
registration certificate application or renewal application of the management
company.
      (3)   The intent of this section is to require a business registration
certificate for the business of leasing or renting commercial or industrial
building(s); for leasing or renting land; for leasing or renting office(s),
suite(s) or other business rental(s); and for leasing or renting dwelling unit
(s).
      (4)   (a)   For the leasing or renting of dwelling unit(s), a separate
business registration certificate shall be required for each legal parcel upon
which the rental unit(s) are located, unless the ownership of a building is
divided as provided in Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 66426 and 66427 as a condominium,
community apartment project or stock cooperative project, and then a separate
business registration certificate shall be required for each such division
where the owner owns less than four units in one complex. Where the owner owns
four or more such units located in the same complex, only one business
registration certificate shall be required. For the purposes of this section,
COMPLEX shall mean the land divided into condominiums, a community apartment
project or a stock cooperative project with any attendant common area and which
is treated together as unified whole.
         (b)   It shall be presumptive evidence that a single-family dwelling
is considered rented if the owner fails to claim the home owner’s property tax
exemption annually applicable according to County Tax Assessor’s records.
Whenever an owner fails to claim such exemption for any calendar year, it shall
be presumed that the properties were rented and therefore, subject to the
business registration, unless the owner establishes to the satisfaction of the
City Clerk that the premises were not rented; provided, however, that the owner
had not advertised or otherwise held out property as being available for lease
or rent during that calendar year.
      (5)   For the leasing or renting of commercial or industrial building(s),
for the leasing or renting of land and for the leasing or renting of office(s),
suite(s) or other business rental(s), a separate business registration
certificate shall be required for each legal parcel upon which the rental unit
(s) are located, or for each building if such building is located on more than
one legal parcel. However, where the ownership of a building is divided as
provided in Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 66426 and 66427 as a condominium or stock
cooperative project then a separate business registration certificate shall be
required for each such division where the owner owns less than four units in
one complex. Where the owner owns four or more such units located in the same
complex, only one business registration certificate shall be required. COMPLEX
shall have the same definition as that in division (G)(4) above.
      (6)   It shall be unlawful for any property owner, landlord, manager or
agent to demand, accept, receive or retain any payment of rent if the unit for
which the rent is paid has not applied for and received a business registration
certificate under this section. Any person violating any of the provisions or
failing to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor
   (G)   Barbershops, manicurist, shampooing or hairdressing parlors. Every
person, firm or corporation conducting, carrying on or managing a business
consisting principally of a barbershop, manicurist, shampooing or hairdressing
parlor and not otherwise specifically covered by other sections of this chapter
shall pay a fee established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (H)   Motor vehicle sales - new and used. Every person, firm or corporation
conducting, carrying on or managing a business consisting principally of
selling new and/or used motor vehicles, whether at retail or wholesale,
including the sale of parts and services, and not covered by other provisions
of this chapter, shall pay a fee established by resolution of the Mayor and
City Council.
(Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983; Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984; Ord. MC-817,
passed 1-7-1992; Ord. MC-935, passed 4-18-1995; Ord. MC-1231, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 5.04.526 INCREASED COST OF MUNICIPAL SERVICES.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council do find and determine that in the area
described in division (E) below, there is a concentration of multi-family
residential housing with an excessively high crime rate, including robberies,
shootings, murders, attempted murders, gang activity and drug dealings,
resulting in higher than usual demand for police services and a high
concentration of blight, resulting in a higher than usual need for code
enforcement, parking control and other city services related to blight
reduction.
   (B)   In the area described in division (E) below, it is determined that the
excessive demand of city service is a cost that should not be borne by the
general tax payers of the city, but should be the responsibility of those most
directly involved who are responsible for the conditions which allow such
circumstances to exist and who have the best opportunity to alleviate the
problem.
   (C)   The Mayor and City Council do further find and determine that the
existence of an effective home owner’s association tends to mitigate and reduce
the existence of the types of crime and blight described in division (A) above
due to being closer to the situation and directly involved with the people who
are affected by the adverse effects of crime and blight, and are the recipients
of improvements in such situations, and due to the fact that those who own or
reside in residential property have a greater incentive to care for that
property and to make it a safe environment in which to live.
   (D)   Therefore, in the area described in division (E) below, the business
registration certificate fee imposed on the operation of rental properties,
pursuant to §
5.04.525(F), shall be increased by the amount of $1,000 annually. Provided,
however, if the owner of such rental property joins an areawide homeowners
association approved by the Mayor and City Council, and records conditions,
covenants and restrictions against the property as approved by the City
Attorney, the amount as added by this section shall no longer, such conditions,
covenants and restrictions shall relate to maintenance and landscaping
standards, parking restrictions, security measures and the right of the
homeowners association, or if such association fails to do so, of the city, to
enforce such conditions by means of entry, summary abatement, lien and legal
action.
   (E)   The property to which this section shall apply is described as
follows: those portions of Tract No. 7106 as per plat thereof recorded in Book
90 of Maps, pages 61 and 62, Tract No. 6890 as per plat thereof recorded in
Book 88 of Maps, pages 34 and 35, Shays Subdivision as per plat thereof
recorded in Book 8 of Maps, page 44, Tract No. 6969 as per plat recorded in
Book 90 of Maps, pages 59 and 60, Tract No. 13233 as per plat thereof recorded
in Book 191 of Maps, pages 85 and 96, Tract No. 6647 as per plat thereof
recorded in Book 86 of Maps, pages 30 and 31, Tract No. 12398 as per plat
thereof recorded in Book 171 of Maps, pages 65 and 66, and Tract No. 10353 as
per plat thereof recorded in Book 152 of Maps, pages 61 and 62, all records of
the County Recorder of said county lying within the following described land:
beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Highland Avenue and Arden
Avenue; thence south along the centerline of said Arden Avenue to the easterly
prolongation of the south line of that certain east/west alley lying south of
and adjacent to the south lines of Lots 41 through 49 of said Tract No. 7106;
thence west along said south line of said alley and its westerly prolongation,
to the centerline of McKinley Street; thence south along said centerline to the
centerline of Roca Street; thence west along said centerline of Roca Street to
the northerly prolongation of the east line of that certain north/south alley
lying east of and adjacent to the east line of Lot 9 of said Tract No. 12398;
thence south along said east line of said alley to the south line of that
certain east/west alley lying south of and adjacent to the south lines of Lots
1 through 9 of said Tract No. 12398; thence west along said south line of said
alley, the westerly prolongation thereof and along the south line of that
certain east/west alley lying south of and adjacent to the south lines of Lots
19 through 32 of said Tract No. 6647, the westerly prolongation thereof and
along the south line of Lot I to said Tract No. 6647 and the westerly
prolongation thereof, to the centerline of Sterling Avenue; thence north along
said centerline to the westerly prolongation of the north line of that certain
east/west alley lying north of and adjacent to the north line of Lots 1 through
13 of said Tract No. 10353; thence east along said prolongation and said north
line of said alley and the easterly prolongation thereof, to the centerline of
Guthrie Street; thence north along said centerline, to the centerline of
Highland Avenue; thence east along said centerline to the point of beginning.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.540 STREET BENCHES - LIABILITY POLICY REQUIRED.
   (A)   For every person, firm or corporation engaging in the business of
painting, installing, erecting, constructing or maintaining benches which are
installed upon the public streets of the city, subject to the provisions
hereof, the fee shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council.
   (B)   It is unlawful to:
      (1)   Place a bench at any location unless prior approval of the Mayor
and City Council has been obtained;
      (2)   Erect, construct or locate or maintain the benches without first
filing and maintaining in force and effect a public liability policy of
insurance in a reputable company in limits as approved by the Mayor and City
Council;
      (3)   Maintain or erect any benches unless a correct list shall be
furnished quarterly to the City Clerk setting forth the location of all benches
used by the certificate holder; and
      (4)   Locate, erect or place any bench other than at bus stops.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.545 CONSTRUCTION BUSINESS - CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on the business of constructing houses, buildings or structures, or bidding or
submitting a bid on the construction of houses, buildings or structures, as a
general contractor, except as provided in divisions (B) and (C) below, the fee
shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on the business of an electric wiring contractor; engaged in the business of
installing electric wires and electric lighting or heating fixtures in houses
or buildings; or bidding or submitting a bid on the installation of electric
wires and electric lighting or heating fixtures in houses or buildings, or
constituting a master electrician within the meaning of the Electrical Code of
the city, the fee shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council.
   (C)   For every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying
on the business of brick mason, building contractor, building, house moving and
house wrecking, cement, concrete, excavating, floor polishing, grading,
interior decorating or wallpaper contractor, landscaping, paint, paving,
plaster, surfacing, trenching and all other subcontractors, and every person,
firm or corporation submitting any bid in connection therewith, the fee shall
be established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (D)   For every person, firm or corporation engaged in or carrying on the
business of plumbing, or submitting any bid in connection therewith, the fee
shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (E)   CONTRACTOR, within the meaning of this article, is a person, firm, co-
partnership, corporation, association or other organization, or any combination
of any thereof, who, for a fixed sum, price, fee percentage or other
compensation, other than wages, undertakes with another for the construction,
alteration, repair, addition to or improvement of any building, highway, road,
railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement
other than to personality, or any part thereof; provided that CONTRACTOR, as
used in this article, includes subcontractors, but does not include anyone who
merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating the same into or
consuming the same in the performance of the work of the contractor as herein
defined.
   (F)   No business registration certificate shall be issued by the City Clerk
or any permit issued by the Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or City
Electrician pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance of the city requiring
the issuance of a license or any permit for building construction, plumbing or
wiring installation to any contractor unless and until such contractor either
exhibits a contractor’s license issued under the authority of and pursuant to
the statutes of the state in the proper classification in relationship to the
work to be performed or establishes to the satisfaction of the City Clerk,
Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or City Electrician, as the case may be,
that he or she is licensed as a contractor by the state to perform such work in
accordance with the law or the rules and regulations of the contractor’s State
License Board. Nothing, however, in this section shall be deemed to prohibit
the issuance of any such permit to the owner of property upon which a building
is being constructed, altered or repaired.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.550 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.555 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.560 PAINTING OF HOUSE NUMBERS.
   For every person, firm or corporation engaged in or carrying on the business
of the painting of house numbers on curbs of streets in the city, the fee shall
be established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.565 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.570 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.575 CERTIFICATES FOR BUSINESSES NOT OTHERWISE COVERED BY ARTICLE.
   Each business, show, exhibition or game conducted, operated or carried on in
the city, which is not otherwise covered by the provisions of this article,
shall be required to apply for and obtain a business registration certificate
before doing business in the city and the fee therefor shall be established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983; Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817,
passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.580 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-382, passed 6-20-1984)
§ 5.04.585 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.590 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
§ 5.04.595 SOLICITORS.
   (A)   For every person acting as a solicitor, as defined in division (F)
below, the fee shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council, except for those solicitors acting as agents or representatives of a
place of business holding a business registration certificate and established
in the city for a period of one year under the same ownership for whom fee
rates shall be established and paid based upon the total gross receipts of the
business as set forth in §
5.04.525(B).
   (B)   In order to be classified as a business having a business registration
certificate and an established place of business in the city for a period of
one year under the same ownership, such business shall continuously comply with
this section and each of the following requirements.
      (1)   A completely representative stock of the merchandise being
solicited shall be on display at the place of business.
      (2)   The established place of business must be open to the public at
least eight hours a day, five days a week.
      (3)   A floor salesperson of the company shall be present at all times
when the place of business is open.
      (4)   The business or company shall have and maintain at the place a sign
of not less than three square feet bearing the name of the firm painted either
on the front of the building or on the unscreened glass facing the front
street, or the sign shall be affixed to the front of the building.
      (5)   Ingress and egress shall be available to the place of business from
the main entrance of the building.
   (C)   For every person soliciting as a representative of, or from, or in
connection with, any other established place of business, the fee shall be
established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council, in addition to the fee
imposed upon the established place of business.
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation soliciting with a number of
solicitors, may elect, at his or her option, to pay a flat rate established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (E)   Each certificate holder shall be required to maintain a current list
of the name and address of each solicitor working under the certificate and the
list and any current changes thereto shall be filed in the office of the City
Clerk prior to any solicitation within the city.
   (F)   A SOLICITOR, within the meaning of this section, is defined to be any
person who goes from house to house, or from place to place, in the city,
selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for, goods,
wares or merchandise or any article for future delivery, or for service to be
performed in the future, or for the making, manufacturing or repairing of any
article or thing whatsoever for future delivery. The foregoing definition of a
SOLICITOR shall be exclusive and controlling, and the fact that a solicitor may
have had previous contacts with the customer through the media of telephone,
correspondence, advertising or by person to person conversation, or that he or
she may have been invited to the house or place, shall not be a defense to, or
excuse for, a violation of any provision of this article, nor affect his or her
status as a solicitor.
   (G)   All orders taken by solicitors shall be in writing in duplicate,
stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in advance, and one copy shall be
given to the purchaser. Each solicitor shall be fingerprinted and photographed
by the Police Department. Solicitation shall cease at sundown.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.605 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1282, passed 8-19-2008)
§ 5.04.610 DETERMINATION OF FEE WHEN TWO BUSINESSES INVOLVED.
   (A)   In the event that any person, firm or corporation is conducting,
managing or carrying on two or more businesses covered by this article at the
same location and under the same management, the fee to be paid by such person,
firm or corporation shall be the highest fee provided for in this article, for
only one of such businesses; provided, however, in such cases where the fee on
one or more of such businesses is based upon the gross annual receipts of such
business and the fee on one or more of such businesses is fixed at a definite
amount, then the fee shall be paid according to the provisions of this article
providing for a fee based upon such gross annual receipts, and the receipt of
the business or businesses upon which the fee is fixed at a definite amount
shall be included in the gross annual receipts for the business or businesses
upon which the fee is based upon the gross annual receipts of such business or
businesses unless the fee upon any one of such businesses is greater in amount
than the fee of the business or businesses upon which the fee is based upon the
gross annual receipts of such business, and in that event the fee paid shall be
the highest fee upon any one of such businesses upon which the fee is fixed at
a definite amount; provided, further, that in such cases where the fee upon two
or more of such businesses are based upon the gross annual receipts of such
business, then separate certificates shall be issued for each such business,
and the fee paid upon each of such businesses in accordance with the amount of
gross annual receipts of each such business.
   (B)   In any event, any person, firm or corporation conducting any business
covered under the terms of this article providing for the payment of a fee
based upon volume of business, number of persons employed, number of vehicles
used or other basis shall make and file the verified statements provided for in
this article except as otherwise provided for in this article.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.615 SEPARATE CERTIFICATES FOR SEPARATE LOCATIONS.
   In the event any person, firm or corporation is conducting, managing or
carrying on two or more businesses at separate locations, each location is, for
the purpose of this article, deemed a separate business in computing and fixing
the fee; provided, however, that warehouses and distributing plants located in
the city used in connection with and incidental to a business for which a
registration certificate has been issued to an address located within the city
shall not be deemed to be branch establishments or separate locations;
provided, further, that no business transactions shall be carried on in such
incidental or supplemental warehouses or distributing plants.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992; Ord. MC-935, passed 4-18-1995)
§ 5.04.620 FEE FOR VEHICLES USED IN CONDUCTING BUSINESS.
   Every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on any
business of any kind in the city and employing vehicles, automobiles or motor
vehicles in the conduct of such business shall pay a fee established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council for each such vehicle, automobile or
motor vehicle used in such business within the corporate limits of the city;
provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any person, firm or
corporation holding a certificate for any such business under any other
provision of this article.
(Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.625 APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER TO EXEMPT PERSONS.
   Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed or construed as applying
to any person, firm or corporation conducting, managing or carrying on, or
engaged in any business or occupation exempt from taxation by municipal
corporations, by virtue of § 14, Article XIII of the California Constitution,
or by the U.S. Constitution.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.626 EXEMPTION - VETERANS.
   Every peddler, solicitor or other person claiming to be entitled to
exemption from the payment of any fee provided for in this chapter upon the
ground that he or she is an honorably discharged or released soldier, sailor or
marine of the United States or Confederate States who is physically unable to
obtain a livelihood by manual labor and who shall be a qualified elector of the
state or otherwise evidences residency within the state, as provided in the
laws of this state, shall, in addition to any other information required by
this chapter, file with the City Clerk’s office a certificate of a regularly
licensed and practicing physician dated within a month of said application, to
the effect that said applicant is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by
manual labor, and stating the nature of said incapacitation; verification that
the applicant is an honorably discharged veteran of the United States or
Confederate States, and verification that the applicant is a registered voter
of this state or otherwise evidences residency within the state. Upon proof of
the foregoing, the City Clerk shall issue, without charge, a certificate to a
qualified applicant to solicit, sell, hawk, peddle or vend his or her goods.
Certificate holders under the provisions of this section shall be required to
comply with all other provisions of this chapter. Any certificate issued
hereunder shall be personal to the veteran, and shall not authorize soliciting,
selling, hawking, peddling or vending by an agent, employee or representative
of the veteran. The certificate shall also be limited to hawking, peddling and
vending goods and merchandise owned by the veteran personally.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.630 APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER TO NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   The provisions of this article relating to business registration
certificates and fees therefor shall not apply to any bona fide non-profit
charitable, fraternal or religious corporation, association, institution or
organization when the proceeds of the activities covered by the exemption are
to be used for the lawful purposes of the organization; provided, however, that
no exemption under this article shall be valid unless application therefor has
been made in writing to the City Clerk, and a certificate of exemption issued
by the City Clerk, which certificate shall cover a period of no more than one
year from date thereof, and shall be displayed or available for presentment to
any enforcement officer of the city on request, on the premises covered by the
certificate; and provided, further, that no exemption shall be granted under
this article when any person, firm, concern or organization not meeting the
foregoing qualifications receives any share or interest in the activities
proposed to be covered by the exemption, or the proceeds or income therefrom.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.635 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 5.04.640 APPLICABILITY OF CRIMINAL AND REGULATORY PROCEDURES.
   Nothing provided in this article shall prevent criminal prosecutions as
otherwise provided by law, or the application of any regulatory procedures in
instances where the field is not preempted by state law.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992; Ord. MC-991, passed 2-19-1997)
§ 5.04.645 FEES FOR REVENUE PURPOSES.
   Any fees provided for in this article which are applicable to a person, firm
or corporation licensed by the state are for revenue and not regulatory
purposes.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.650 SUSPENSION, CANCELLATION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Any certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this article or
any amendment thereof or of any ordinance for the conducting of business may be
suspended, canceled or permanently revoked for good cause by the Mayor and City
Council; provided that notice of the time and place of the hearing and a
general statement of the nature of the grounds for good cause shall be given to
the certificate holder by the City Clerk at least ten days before such hearing
by personal service upon the certificate holder or by certified mail to the
last known address of such certificate holder. The certificate holder may be
represented by his or her attorney at law at the hearing.
   (B)   (1)   The determination of the Mayor and City Council that good cause
for the suspension, cancellation or revocation of such exists shall be
conclusive.
      (2)   Good cause for such suspension, cancellation or revocation shall
include, but is not limited to, the following grounds:
         (a)   The existence of unsanitary conditions, noise, disturbances or
other conditions at or near the premises which cause, or tend to cause, a
public nuisance, or which injuriously affect the public health, safety or
welfare;
         (b)   The commission of, or permitting or causing the commission of,
any act in the operation of the business, which act is made unlawful or is
prohibited by any ordinance, rule or law of the city, state or federal
government;
         (c)   Unfair, unjust, inequitable or fraudulent practices in the
operation of the business or concealment or misrepresentation in procuring the
certificate or other permit required for such business; and
         (d)   The omission or causing or permitting the omission or any act or
duty which is required by this code or other law to be performed by the
certificate holder or any officer, employee or agent thereof, in the operation
of the business or any misrepresentation made in the performance of such act or
duty.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.655 DUTY OF AUDITOR.
   It shall be the duty of the auditor employed by the city to audit the books
and records of the city to make annually a test check of the payment of fees as
required by this article and said auditor shall report the result of the test
check to the Mayor.
(Ord. MC-817, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 5.04.660 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983)
CHAPTER 5.05: MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018)
CHAPTER 5.08: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-294, passed 8-3-1983)
CHAPTER 5.10: COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES
Section
   
5.10.010   Purpose and intent
   
5.10.020   Legal authority
   
5.10.030   Commercial cannabis activities prohibited unless specifically
authorized by this chapter
   
5.10.040   Compliance with laws
   
5.10.050   Definitions
   
5.10.060   Commercial cannabis business permit required to engage in commercial
cannabis business
   
5.10.070   Cannabis employee requirements
   
5.10.080   Maximum number and type of authorized commercial cannabis businesses
permitted
   
5.10.090   Initial application procedure
   
5.10.100   Persons prohibited from holding a commercial cannabis business
permit or being employed by a commercial cannabis business
   
5.10.110   Expiration of commercial cannabis business permits
   
5.10.120   Revocation of permits
   
5.10.130   Renewal applications
   
5.10.140   Effect of state license suspension, revocation or termination
   
5.10.150   Appeals
   
5.10.160   Written request for appeal
   
5.10.170   Appeal hearing
   
5.10.180   Commercial cannabis business permittee selection process
   
5.10.190   Updated information
   
5.10.200   Change in ownership or location
   
5.10.210   City business registration certificate
   
5.10.220   Building permits and inspection
   
5.10.230   Certification from the Director of Community Development and Housing
   
5.10.240   Right to occupy and to use property
   
5.10.250   Location and design of cannabis businesses
   
5.10.260   Limitations on city’s liability
   
5.10.270   Records and record-keeping
   
5.10.280   Security measures
   
5.10.290   Restriction on alcohol and tobacco sales
   
5.10.300   Fees and charges
   
5.10.310   Miscellaneous operating requirements
   
5.10.320   Other operational requirements
   
5.10.330   Operating requirements for retailer facilities; delivery
   
5.10.340   Operating requirements for commercial cultivation facilities
   
5.10.350   Operating requirements for testing labs
   
5.10.360   Cannabis manufacturing: edibles and other cannabis products; sale or
distribution of edible and other cannabis products
   
5.10.370   Promulgation of regulations, standards and other legal duties
   
5.10.380   Community relations
   
5.10.390   Fees deemed debt to the city
   
5.10.400   Permittee responsible for violations
   
5.10.410   Inspection and enforcement
   
5.10.420   Compliance with state regulation
   
5.10.425   Integrity provision
   
5.10.430   Violations declared a public nuisance
   
5.10.440   Each violation a separate offense
   
5.10.450   Criminal penalties
   
5.10.460   Remedies cumulative and not exclusive
§ 5.10.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to implement the provisions of
the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (“MAUCRSA”) to
accommodate the needs of medically-ill persons and provide access to cannabis
for medicinal purposes as recommended by their health care provider(s) and to
provide access to adult use for persons over the age of 21 as authorized by the
Control, Tax and Regulate the Adult Use Cannabis Act (“AUMA” or “Proposition
64” passed by California voters in 2016), while imposing sensible regulations
on the use of land to protect the city’s residents, neighborhoods and
businesses from disproportionate and potentially deleterious negative impacts.
As such, it is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the
cultivation, processing, manufacturing, testing, sale, delivery, distribution
and transportation of medicinal and adult use cannabis and cannabis products in
a responsible manner to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the city and to enforce rules and regulations consistent with state law. It
is the further purpose and intent of this chapter to require all commercial
cannabis operators to obtain and renew, annually, a permit to operate within
the city. Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize the possession, use
or provision of cannabis for purposes, or in any manner, that violates state or
federal law. The provisions of this chapter are in addition to any other
permits, licenses and approvals which may be required to conduct business in
the city, and are in addition to any permits, licenses and approval required
under state, city or other law.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, see Cal.
Business and Professions Code, §§ 26000 et seq.
   Proposition 64, the initiative known as the Control, Tax and Regulate the
Adult Use Cannabis Act, No. 15-0103, see Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§
11362.1 et seq. and Cal. Business and Professions Code, §§ 26000 et seq.
§ 5.10.020 LEGAL AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to §§ 5 and 7 of Article XI of the California Constitution, the
provisions of MAUCRSA, any subsequent state legislation and/or regulations
regarding the same, and the City Charter, the Mayor and City Council are
authorized to adopt ordinances that establish standards, requirements and
regulations for the licensing and permitting of commercial medicinal and adult
use cannabis activity. Any standards, requirements and regulations regarding
health and safety, security, reporting and worker protections established by
the state, or any of its departments or divisions, shall be the minimum
standards applicable in the city to all commercial cannabis activity.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.030 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED UNLESS SPECIFICALLY
AUTHORIZED BY THIS CHAPTER.
   Except as specifically authorized in this chapter, the commercial
cultivation, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling,
sale, delivery, distribution or transportation (other than as provided under
the Cal. Business and Professions Code, § 26090(e)) of cannabis or cannabis
product is expressly prohibited in the city.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.040 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any actions that
violate federal, state or local law with respect to the operation of a
commercial cannabis business. It shall be the responsibility of the owners, the
operators and the employees of the commercial cannabis business to ensure that
the commercial cannabis business is, at all times, operating in a manner
compliant with all applicable federal, state and local laws, including for as
long as applicable, the Compassionate Use Act (“Proposition 215”), the Medical
Marijuana Program Act (“MMPA”) and the 2008 Attorney General Guidelines for the
Security and Non-Diversion of Cannabis for Medical Purposes (“AG Guidelines”)
(collectively “the Medical Cannabis Collective Laws”), any subsequently enacted
state law or regulatory, licensing or certification requirements, and any
specific, additional operating procedures or requirements which may be imposed
as conditions of approval of the commercial cannabis business permit.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
Cross-reference:
   Commercial cannabis business permittee selection process, see §
5.10.180
Statutory reference:
   Compassionate Use Act, see Cal. Health and Safety Code, Division 10, Chapter
6, Article 2, § 11362.5
   Medical Marijuana Program Act (“MMPA”), see Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§
11362.7 through 11362.85
§ 5.10.050 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any
reference to state statutes includes any regulations promulgated thereunder,
and is deemed to include any successor or amended version of the referenced
statute or regulatory provision.
   A-LICENSE. A state license issued under the Cal. Business and Professions
Code, Division 10 for cannabis or cannabis products that are intended for
adults 21 years of age and over and who do not possess physician’s
recommendations.
   A-LICENSEE. Any person holding a license under the Cal. Business and
Professions Code, Division 10 for cannabis or cannabis products that are
intended for adults 21 years of age and over and who do not possess physician’s
recommendations.
   ADULT USE OF CANNABIS ACT (AUMA), or the CONTROL, TAX AND REGULATE THE ADULT
USE CANNABIS ACT or PROPOSITION 64. The initiative known as the Control, Tax
and Regulate the Adult Use Cannabis Act, No. 15-0103, see Cal. Health and
Safety Code, § 11362.1 et seq. and Cal. Business and Professions Code, § 26000
et seq.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit pursuant to this chapter.
   CANNABIS. All parts of the Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica or
Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin,
whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant,
its seeds or resin. CANNABIS also means the separated resin, whether crude or
purified, obtained from CANNABIS. CANNABIS does not include the mature stalks
of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber,
oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination. For the purpose of this definition, CANNABIS does not mean
industrial hemp, as defined by the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11018.5.
   CANNABIS CONCENTRATE. Cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate
one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product’s potency.
Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate for
purposes of this division. A CANNABIS CONCENTRATE is not considered food, as
defined by the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 109935, or drug, as defined by
the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 109925.
   CANNABIS PRODUCT. A product containing cannabis, including, but not limited
to, manufactured cannabis, intended to be sold for use by cannabis patients in
the state pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215),
found at the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11362.5 (as the same may be amended
from time to time) or pursuant to the Adult Use of Cannabis Act. For purposes
of this chapter, “cannabis” does not include industrial hemp, as defined by the
Cal. Food and Agricultural Code, § 81000 or the Cal. Health and Safety Code, §
11018.5.
   CANOPY. The designated area(s) at a premises, except nurseries, that will
contain mature plants at any point in time.
      (1)   CANOPY shall be calculated in square feet and measured using
clearly identifiable boundaries of all areas(s) that will contain mature plants
at any point in time, including all of the space(s) within the boundaries; and
      (2)   CANOPY may be non-contiguous but each unique area included in the
total canopy calculation shall be separated by an identifiable boundary which
includes, but is not limited to: interior walls, shelves, greenhouse walls,
hoop house walls, garden benches, hedgerows, fencing, garden beds or garden
plots; and if mature plants are being cultivated using a shelving system, the
surface area of each level shall be included in the total CANOPY calculation.
   CAREGIVER or PRIMARY CAREGIVER. Have the same meaning as that term is
defined in the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11362.7.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino, a California charter city.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY. Includes the cultivation, possession,
manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging,
labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products as
provided for in this chapter.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS. Any person which engages in commercial
cannabis activity.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMIT. A regulatory permit issued by the city
pursuant to this chapter to a commercial cannabis business, and is required
before any commercial cannabis activity may be conducted in the city. The
initial permit and annual renewal of a COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMIT is
made expressly contingent upon the business’ ongoing compliance with all of the
requirements of this chapter and any regulations adopted by the city governing
the commercial cannabis activity at issue.
   COMPASSIONATE USE ACT (PROPOSITION 215). The Compassionate Use Act of 1996,
found at the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11362.5.
   CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting,
drying, curing, grading or trimming of cannabis.
   CULTIVATION SITE. A location where cannabis is planted, grown, harvested,
dried, cured, graded or trimmed, or a location where any combination of those
activities occurs.
   CUSTOMER. A natural person 21 years of age or over or a natural person 18
years of age or older who possesses a physician’s recommendation.
   DAYCARE CENTER. Has the same meaning as in the Cal. Health and Safety Code,
§ 1596.76.
   DELIVERY. The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a
customer. DELIVERY also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform owned and controlled by the retailer.
   DEPARTMENT. The consolidated Department of Cannabis Control enacted with AB
141 (2021).
   DISPENSING. Any activity involving the retail sale of cannabis or cannabis
products from a retailer.
   DISTRIBUTION. The procurement, sale and transport of cannabis and cannabis
products between licensees.
   DISTRIBUTOR. A person holding a valid commercial cannabis business permit
issued by the City of San Bernardino, and a valid state license for
distribution, required by state law to engage in the business of purchasing
cannabis from a licensed cultivator, or cannabis products from a licensed
manufacturer, for sale to a licensed retailer.
   DRIED FLOWER. All dead cannabis that has been harvested, dried, cured or
otherwise processed, excluding leaves and stems.
   EMPLOYEE. Any natural person who is employed or retained as an independent
contractor by any permittee in consideration for direct or indirect monetary
wages or profit, or any natural person who volunteers his or her services for
an employer.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. Has the same meaning as in §
2.12.020.
   HARVEST BATCH. A specifically identified quantity of dried flower or trim,
leaves and other cannabis plant matter that is uniform in strain, harvested at
the same time and, if applicable, cultivated using the same pesticides and
other agricultural chemicals, and harvested at the same time.
   LABELING. Any label or other written, printed or graphic matter upon a
cannabis product, upon its container.
   LICENSE. A permit or license issued by the State of California, or one of
its departments or divisions, under the Cal. Business and Professions Code,
Division 10, to engage in commercial cannabis activity, including both an A-
license and an M-license, as well as a testing laboratory license.
   LICENSEE. Any person holding a state license under the Cal. Business and
Professions Code, Division 10, regardless of whether the license held is an A-
license or an M-license, and includes the holder of a testing laboratory
license.
   LICENSING AUTHORITY. The state agency responsible for the issuance, renewal
or reinstatement of the license, or the state agency authorized to take
disciplinary action against the licensee.
   LIVE PLANTS. Living cannabis flowers and plants, including seeds, immature
plants and vegetative stage plants.
   M-LICENSE. A state license issued for commercial cannabis activity involving
medicinal cannabis.
   M-LICENSEE. Any person holding a license for commercial cannabis activity
involving medicinal cannabis.
   MANUFACTURE. To compound, blend, extract, infuse or otherwise make or
prepare a cannabis product.
   MANUFACTURED CANNABIS. Raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the
raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, extraction or
other manufactured product intended for internal consumption through inhalation
or oral ingestion or for topical application.
   MANUFACTURER. A person issued a valid commercial cannabis business permit by
the City of San Bernardino and a valid state license as required, that conducts
the production, preparation, propagation or compounding of cannabis or cannabis
products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction
and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis
or cannabis products or labels or container.
   MAUCRSA. The Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act,
Cal. Business and Professions Code, Division 10, commencing with § 26000.
   MEDICINAL CANNABIS or MEDICINAL CANNABIS PRODUCT. Cannabis or a cannabis
product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the
Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at the Cal. Health and
Safety Code, § 11362.5, by a medicinal cannabis patient in California who
possesses a physician’s recommendation.
   NON-VOLATILE SOLVENT. Any solvent used in the extraction process that is not
a volatile solvent. For purposes of this chapter, a NON-VOLATILE SOLVENT
includes carbon dioxide (CO2) used for extraction and ethanol used for
extraction or post extraction processing.
   NURSERY. A person issued a valid commercial cannabis business permit from
the City of San Bernardino and a valid state license as required that produces
only clones, immature plants, seeds and other agricultural products used
specifically for the propagation and cultivation of cannabis.
   OPERATION. Any act for which a commercial cannabis business permit is
required under the provisions of this chapter or any commercial transfer of
cannabis or cannabis products.
   OWNER. Any of the following:
      (1)   A person with an aggregate ownership interest of 20% or more in the
person applying for a license or a licensee, unless the interest is solely a
security, lien or encumbrance;
      (2)   The Executive Director of a non-profit or other entity;
      (3)   A member of the board of directors of a non-profit; and
      (4)   An individual who will be participating in the direction, control
or management of the person applying for a commercial cannabis business permit
or who has a financial interest in the commercial cannabis business other than
a fixed lease of real property.
   PACKAGE. Any container or receptacle used for holding cannabis or cannabis
products.
   PATIENT or QUALIFIED PATIENT. Shall have the same definition as Cal. Health
and Safety Code, §§ 11362.7 et seq., as it may be amended, and which means a
person who is entitled to the protections of Cal. Health and Safety Code, §
11362.5.
   PERMIT. A commercial cannabis business permit issued by the City of San
Bernardino under this chapter.
   PERMITTEE. Any person holding a permit under this chapter.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business
trust, receiver, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit,
and the plural as well as the singular.
   PHYSICIAN’S RECOMMENDATION. A recommendation by a physician and surgeon that
a patient use cannabis provided in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act of
1996 (Proposition 215) found at the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11362.5.
   PREMISES. The designated structure or structures and land specified in the
application that is owned, leased or otherwise held under the control of the
applicant or permittee where the commercial cannabis activity will be or is
conducted. The PREMISES shall be a contiguous area and shall only be occupied
by one permittee.
   PURCHASER. The customer who is engaged in a transaction with a permittee for
purposes of obtaining cannabis or cannabis products.
   RETAILER. A commercial cannabis business that offers cannabis, cannabis
products or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products, either
individually or in any combination, for retail sale, including an establishment
(whether fixed or mobile) that delivers, pursuant to express authorization,
cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale, and where the operator
holds a valid commercial cannabis business permit from the City of San
Bernardino authorizing the operation of a RETAILER, and a valid state license
as required by state law to operate a RETAILER.
   SELL, SALE and TO SELL. Include any transaction whereby, for any
consideration, title to cannabis or cannabis products are transferred from one
person to another, and includes the delivery of cannabis or cannabis products
pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or
receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return by the
original purchaser to the location where the product was purchased.
   TESTING LABORATORY. A laboratory, facility or entity in the state that
offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both of
the following:
      (1)   Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all
other persons involved in commercial cannabis activity in the state; and
      (2)   Holds a valid commercial cannabis business permit from the city and
a state license as required.
   TRANSPORT. The transfer of cannabis products from the permitted business
location of one licensee to the permitted business location of another
licensee, for the purposes of conducting commercial cannabis activity.
   YOUTH CENTER. Has the same meaning as in the Cal. Health and Safety Code, §
11353.1.
   VOLATILE SOLVENT. Any solvent that is or produces a flammable gas or vapor
that, when present in the air in sufficient quantities, will create explosive
or ignitable mixtures. Examples of VOLATILE SOLVENTS include, but are not
limited to, butane, hexane and propane.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.060 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMIT REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN COMMERCIAL
CANNABIS BUSINESS.
   (A)   (1)   No person may engage in any commercial cannabis business or in
any commercial cannabis activity within the city, including cultivation,
manufacture, processing, laboratory testing, transporting, dispensing, special
events, distribution or sale of cannabis or a cannabis product unless the
person:
         (a)   Has a valid commercial cannabis business permit from the city;
         (b)   Has a valid state seller’s permit; and
         (c)   Is currently in compliance with all applicable state and local
laws and regulations pertaining to the commercial cannabis business and the
commercial cannabis activities, including the duty to obtain a city business
registration certificate and any required state licenses.
      (2)   Engaging in a commercial cannabis business or in any commercial
cannabis activity includes establishing, owning, managing, conducting, leasing
to, operating, causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing
the fact of such an act.
   (B)   Until Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11362.775(a) is repealed, the
city intends that persons eligible to operate collectives or cooperatives under
that subdivision shall be eligible to apply for a city conditional permit to
conduct commercial cannabis activities, but only to the degree those activities
are authorized under state law for collectives and cooperatives. When the Cal.
Health and Safety Code, § 11362.775(a) is repealed, or as soon as collectives
and cooperatives are no longer permitted to engage in commercial cannabis
activity without a state license under state law, any conditional permit issued
to a commercial cannabis business that has not obtained a state license for the
commercial cannabis activities shall expire and shall be null and void. Such
businesses shall no longer be authorized to engage in any commercial cannabis
activities in the city until they obtain both a city issued commercial cannabis
business permit and a state license for that commercial cannabis activity.
   (C)   No temporary events shall be permitted at a state designated fair, as
that term is defined in Cal. Business and Professions Code, § 19418(a), unless
the state designated fair has complied with the requirements of division (A)
above and the temporary event is authorized pursuant to a development agreement
with the city approved in accordance with Chapter 19.40. Temporary events are
prohibited citywide except at a state designated fair.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.070 CANNABIS EMPLOYEE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any person who is an employee within a commercial cannabis business
must be legally authorized to do so under applicable state law.
   (B)   A commercial cannabis business shall keep the following records of
each of its employees on file at the premises of the business:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of the employee;
      (2)   Age and verification of employee. A copy of a birth certificate,
driver’s license, government issued identification card, passport or other
proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age must be on file with the
business;
      (3)   A list of any crimes enumerated in Cal. Business and Professions
Code, § 26057(b)(4) for which the employee has been convicted;
      (4)   Name, address and contact person for all previous employers of the
employee for the last ten years, including, but not limited to, all employers
from which the applicant was fired, resigned or asked to leave and the reasons
for such dismissal or firing;
      (5)   The fingerprints and a recent photograph of the employee; and
      (6)   If applicable, verification that the employee is a qualified
patient or primary caregiver.
   (D)   The permittee shall provide to the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, upon request, the records described in division (B) above. The Chief
of Police, or his or her designee, may review the records and may conduct a
background check to determine whether the employee has been convicted of a
crime that shows the employee:
      (1)   Is dishonest;
      (2)   Has committed a felony or misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit or
embezzlement;
      (3)   Was convicted of a violent felony, a crime of moral turpitude; or
      (4)   The illegal use, possession, transportation, distribution or
similar activities related to controlled substances, as defined in the Federal
Controlled Substances Act, being 21 U.S.C. §§ 801 et seq., except for cannabis
related offenses for which the conviction occurred after the passage of the
Compassionate Use Act of 1996.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
Editor’s note:
   Section 5.10.070(C) is not given in texts of either Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-
7-2018 or of Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018.
§ 5.10.080 MAXIMUM NUMBER AND TYPE OF AUTHORIZED COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESSES
PERMITTED.
   The number of each type of commercial cannabis business that shall be
permitted to operate in the city shall be established by resolution of the
Mayor and City Council but at no time shall the total number of permits for all
license types exceed one permit per 12,500 residents of the city as determined
by the most recent “Population Estimates for Cities, Counties and the State
Report” generated by the State Department of Finance and Management Services
for the most recent year, unless the Mayor and City Council adopt an ordinance
allowing for a greater number of total permits.
   (A)   This chapter is only intended to create a maximum number of commercial
cannabis businesses that may be issued permits to operate in the city. Nothing
in this chapter creates a mandate that the Mayor and City Council must issue
any or all of the commercial cannabis business permits if it is determined that
the applicants do not meet the standards which are established in the
application requirements or further amendments to the application process or
that the Mayor and City Council, upon further deliberation, determines that the
issuance of any or all commercial cannabis business permits will impact the
public safety, welfare or other policy concerns which may be detrimental in the
issuance of these permits.
   (B)   Each year following the Mayor and City Council’s initial award of
permits, if any, or at any time in the Mayor and City Council’s discretion, the
Mayor and City Council may reassess the number of commercial cannabis business
permits which are authorized for issuance to each business type. The Mayor and
City Council, in its discretion, may determine by resolution that the number of
each type of commercial cannabis permits should be reduced, stay the same or be
expanded.
   (C)   In accordance with the first paragraph of this section, the City
Council has elected to increase the maximum number of cannabis permits that can
be lawfully awarded in accordance with the population formula set forth in this
section as follows: the city may award up to 17 retail business permits. This
maximum number of retail business permits shall include all awarded
microbusiness permits so that there are no more than a total of 17 retail and
microbusiness permits, which include a retail component. The city may award an
unlimited number of cannabis business permits for other types of cannabis
businesses in accordance with the restrictions set forth in this chapter,
applicable guidelines adopted in accordance with this chapter and any zoning
regulations adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018; Ord. MC-1541,
passed 9-2-2020; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.10.090 INITIAL APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council shall adopt, by resolution, the procedures
to govern the application process, and the manner in which the decision will
ultimately be made regarding the issuance of any commercial cannabis business
permit(s), which resolution shall include or require the City Manager to
provide detailed objective review criteria to be evaluated on a point system or
equivalent quantitative evaluation scale tied to each set of review criteria
(“review criteria”), which shall require any applicable environmental review
pursuant to the Cal. Public Resources Code, Division 13 (commencing with §
21000), as contemplated by Cal. Business and Professions Code, § 26055(h). The
resolution shall authorize the City Manager, or his or her designee(s), to
prepare the necessary forms; adopt any necessary rules to the application,
regulations and processes; solicit applications; conduct initial evaluations of
the applicants; and to ultimately provide a final recommendation to the Mayor
and City Council.
   (B)   At the time of filing, each applicant shall pay an application fee
established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council to cover all costs
incurred by the city in the application process.
   (C)   After the initial review, ranking and scoring under the review
criteria, the City Manager, or his or her designee(s), will make a
recommendation to the Mayor and City Council, and the Mayor and City Council
shall make a final determination in accordance with §
5.10.180.
   (D)   The city’s reservation of rights.
      (1)   The city reserves the right to reject any or all initial
applications. Prior to permit issuance, the city may also modify, postpone or
cancel any request for applications, or the entire program under this chapter,
at any time without liability, obligation or commitment to any party, firm or
organization, to the extent permitted by law. Persons submitting applications
assume the risk that all or any part of the program, or any particular category
of permit potentially authorized under this chapter, may be cancelled at any
time prior to permit issuance. The city further reserves the right to request
and obtain additional information from any candidate submitting an application.
      (2)   In addition to any other justification provided, including a
failure to comply with other requirements in this chapter, an application risks
being rejected for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   The application was received after the designated time and date;
         (b)   The application did not contain the required elements, exhibits
nor organized in the required format; or
         (c)   The application was not considered fully responsive to the
request for permit application.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.100 PERSONS PROHIBITED FROM HOLDING A COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS
PERMIT OR BEING EMPLOYED BY A COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS.
   No person may hold a commercial cannabis business permit, or be employed by
a commercial cannabis business, in the city, if any of the following conditions
exist:
   (A)   The applicant, permittee or employee has been denied a commercial
cannabis business permit, or similar license, or has had such a permit or
license suspended or revoked by any city, county, city and county or any state
cannabis licensing authority;
   (B)   The applicant, permittee, employee or the owner of the property upon
which the proposed commercial cannabis activity is to occur was either
convicted of, pled guilty or nolo contendere to or has been found by the city’s
hearing officer pursuant to
Chapters 9.92 or
9.93 to be responsible for conducting commercial cannabis activity in non-
compliance with Title 19, other city ordinances, codes and requirements, or
state law, and they failed to discontinue operating in a timely manner; or
   (C)   The applicant, permittee or employee, or the owner of the property
upon which the proposed commercial cannabis activity is to occur, was found by
the appropriate taxing agency to have been in non-compliance with federal,
state or local tax laws or failed to report income from commercial cannabis
activities to federal, state or local government in violation of law.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.110 EXPIRATION OF COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMITS.
   Each commercial cannabis business permit issued pursuant to this chapter
shall expire three years after the date of its issuance. Commercial cannabis
business permits may be renewed as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.120 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   Commercial cannabis business permits may be suspended or revoked by the City
Manager, or his or her designee, for any violation of any law and/or any rule,
regulation and/or standard adopted pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.130 RENEWAL APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit
shall be filed at least 60 calendar days prior to the expiration date of the
current permit.
   (B)   The renewal application shall contain all the information required for
new applications.
   (C)   The applicant shall pay a fee in an amount to be set by resolution of
the Mayor and City Council to cover the costs of processing the renewal permit
application, together with any costs incurred by the city to administer the
program created under this chapter.
   (D)   An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit
shall be rejected if any of the following exists:
      (1)   The application for renewal is filed less than 60 days before the
expiration of the commercial cannabis business permit;
      (2)   The commercial cannabis business permit is suspended or revoked at
the time of the application;
      (3)   The commercial cannabis business has not been in regular and
continuous operation in the four months prior to the renewal application;
      (4)   The commercial cannabis business has failed to conform to the
requirements of this chapter or of any regulations adopted pursuant to this
chapter;
      (5)   The permittee fails or is unable to renew its state license; or
      (6)   If the city has determined, based on substantial evidence, that the
permittee or applicant is in violation of the requirements of this chapter, of
the municipal code or of the state rules and regulations, and the city or state
has determined that the violation is grounds for termination or revocation of
the commercial cannabis business permit.
   (E)   The Director of Community Development and Housing, or his or her
designee(s), is authorized to make all decisions concerning the issuance of a
renewal permit. In making the decision, the Director of Community Development
and Housing, or his or her designee(s), is authorized to impose additional
conditions to a renewal permit, if it is determined to be necessary to ensure
compliance with state or local laws and regulations or to preserve the public
health, safety or welfare. Appeals from the decision of the Director of
Community Development and Housing, or his or her designee(s), shall be handled
pursuant to §§
5.10.150,
5.10.160 and
5.10.170.
   (F)   If a renewal application is rejected, a person may file a new
application pursuant to this chapter no sooner than one year from the date of
the rejection.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.10.140 EFFECT OF STATE LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR TERMINATION.
   Suspension of a license issued by the state, or by any of its departments or
divisions, shall immediately suspend the ability of a commercial cannabis
business to operate within the city, until the state, or its respective
department or division, reinstates or reissues the state license. Should the
state, or any of its departments or divisions, revoke or terminate the license
of a commercial cannabis business, such revocation or termination shall also
revoke or terminate the ability of a commercial cannabis business to operate
within the city.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.150 APPEALS.
   Unless specifically provided elsewhere to the contrary, any determination of
the Chief of Police or Director of Community Development and Housing, or the
designees of either of them, may only be appealed to the City Manager, which
decision shall be final. The City Manager may delegate the appeal to the city’s
administrative law officer (“hearing officer”) appointed in conformity with
Chapter 9.92, in which case, the decision of the hearing officer shall be
final. All decisions of the Mayor and City Council, City Manager or hearing
officer under this chapter shall be final. All appeals shall be conducted as
prescribed in this section and §§
5.10.160 and
5.10.170.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.10.160 WRITTEN REQUEST FOR APPEAL.
   (A)   Within ten calendar days after the date of the determination, an
aggrieved party may appeal such determination by filing a written appeal with
the City Clerk setting forth the reasons why the determination was not proper.
If no appeal of a determination is made within ten days of the date of the
determination, the determination shall be final.
   (B)   At the time of filing, the appellant shall pay the designated appeal
fee, established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council from time to time.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.170 APPEAL HEARING.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the written appeal, the City Clerk shall set the
matter for a hearing before the City Manager, or if the appeal has been
delegated to the hearing officer, before the hearing officer. The City Manager
or hearing officer shall hear the matter de novo and shall conduct the hearing
pursuant to the procedures set forth by the city.
   (B)   The appeal shall be held within a reasonable time after the filing the
appeal, but in no event later than 90 calendar days from the date of such
filing. The city shall notify the appellant of the time and location at least
ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (C)   At the hearing, the appellant may present any information they deem
relevant to the determination appealed. The formal rules of evidence and
procedure applicable in a court of law shall not apply to the hearing.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager or hearing officer
may affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.180 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMITTEE SELECTION PROCESS.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council shall adopt, by resolution, a procedure
guideline and review criteria by which the top applicants in each category of
each commercial cannabis business will be presented to the Mayor and City
Council for a final determination at a public hearing.
   (B)   The top final applicants for each category may be invited to attend
the Mayor and City Council meeting, only if requested by the City Manager, or
his or her designee, where they may be expected to make a public presentation
introducing their team and providing an overview of their proposal. In order to
provide adequate time, presentations may be divided over more than one meeting
over multiple days as determined to be necessary.
   (C)   At least ten calendar days prior to the hearing, notice of the hearing
shall be sent to all property owners located within 600 feet of the proposed
business locations of each of the finalists to be considered by the Mayor and
City Council.
   (D)   The Mayor and City Council shall either deny or approve the final
candidates and shall select the top candidates in each category of the
commercial cannabis businesses. The Mayor and City Council’s decision as to the
selection of the prevailing candidates shall be final.
   (E)   Official issuance of the commercial cannabis business permit(s),
however, is conditioned upon the prevailing applicant(s) obtaining all required
land use approvals. Following the Mayor and City Council’s selection, the
prevailing applicant(s) shall apply to the City Department of Community
Development and Housing to obtain any required land use approvals or
entitlements for the permittee’s location, if any. Land use approvals shall
include compliance with all applicable provisions of CEQA. The City Manager, or
his or her designee(s), shall formally issue the commercial cannabis business
permit(s) once the Director of Community Development and Housing, or his or her
designee(s), affirms that all of the required land use approvals have been
obtained.
   (F)   Issuance of a commercial cannabis business permit does not create a
land use entitlement or serve as a building permit. The commercial cannabis
business permit shall only be for a term of three years, and shall expire at
the end of the three-year period, unless it is renewed as provided herein.
Furthermore, no permittee may begin operations, notwithstanding the issuance of
a permit, unless all of the state and local laws and regulations, including,
but not limited to, the requirements of this chapter, applicable building
permits and conditions of the commercial cannabis business permit, have been
complied with. Until a state license is available and obtained by the
permittee, this means compliance with all provisions of the Medical Cannabis
Collective Laws as set forth in §
5.10.060.
   (G)   Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the Mayor
and City Council reserves the right to reject any or all applications if it
determines it would be in the best interest of the city, taking into account
any health, safety and welfare impacts on the community. Applicants shall have
no right to a commercial cannabis business permit until a permit is actually
issued, and then only for the duration of the permit term. Each applicant
assumes the risk that, at any time prior to the issuance of a permit, the Mayor
and City Council may terminate or delay the program created under this chapter
or otherwise revise, amend or repeal this chapter.
   (H)   If an application is denied, a new application may not be filed for
one year from the date of the denial.
   (I)   Each person granted a commercial cannabis business permit shall be
required to pay the permit fee established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council to cover the costs of administering the commercial cannabis business
permit program created in this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.10.190 UPDATED INFORMATION.
   Within 15 calendar days of any other change in the information provided in
the application form or any change in status of compliance with the provisions
of this chapter, including any change in the commercial cannabis business
location or ownership or management members, the applicant shall file an
updated application form with the City Manager, or his or her designee(s), for
review along with an application amendment fee, as set forth in §§
5.10.090 and
5.10.130.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.200 CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP OR LOCATION.
   (A)   The person granted a commercial cannabis business permit shall not
transfer ownership or control of the permit to another person unless and until
the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the City Manager, or his
or her designee, stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an
amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the
City Manager, or his or her designee, in accordance with all provisions of this
chapter (as though the transferee were applying for an original commercial
cannabis business permit) accompanied by a transfer fee in an amount set by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council (or if not set, shall be the same
amount as the application fee), and the City Manager, or his or her designee,
determines, after hearing, in accordance with this chapter that the transferee
passed the background check required for permittees and meets all other
requirements of this chapter. No transfer of ownership may occur within five
years of the date the commercial cannabis business permit is originally issued,
except as provided below.
   (B)   Commercial cannabis business permits issued through the grant of a
transfer by the City Manager, or his or her designee, shall be valid for a
period of one year beginning on the day the City Manager, or his or her
designee, approves the transfer of the permit. Before the transferee’s permit
expires, the transferee shall apply for a renewal permit in the manner required
by this chapter.
   (C)   Changes in ownership of a permittee’s business structure or a
substantial change in the ownership of a permittee business entity (changes
that result in a change of more than 51% of the original ownership) must be
approved by the City Manager, or his or her designee, through the transfer
process contained in division (A) above. Failure to comply with this provision
is grounds for permit revocation.
   (D)   (1)   A permittee may change the form of business entity without
applying to the City Manager, or his or her designee, for a transfer of permit;
provided that either:
         (a)   The membership of the new business entity is substantially
similar to the original permit holder business entity (at least 51% of the
membership is identical); or
         (b)   If the original permittee is an unincorporated association,
mutual or public benefit corporation, agricultural or consumer cooperative
corporation and subsequently transitions to or forms a new business entity as
allowed under the MAUCRSA and to comply with §
5.10.060(B); provided that the Board of Directors (or in the case of an
unincorporated association, the individual(s) listed on the city permit
application) of the original permittee entity are the same as the new business
entity.
      (2)   Although a transfer is not required in these two circumstances, the
permit holder is required to notify the City Manager, in writing, of the change
within ten calendar days of the change. Failure to comply with this provision
is grounds for permit revocation.
   (E)   No commercial cannabis business permit may be transferred when the
City Manager, or his or her designee, has notified the permittee that the
permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.
   (F)   Any attempt to transfer a commercial cannabis business permit, either
directly or indirectly, in violation of this section is declared void, and such
a purported transfer shall be deemed a ground for revocation of the permit.
   (G)   The location specified in the commercial cannabis business permit may
not change without an amendment to the permit, processed in the same manner as
an initial permit pursuant to the process and fees set forth in §
5.10.090.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.210 CITY BUSINESS REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
   Prior to commencing operations, and at all times thereafter, a commercial
cannabis business shall maintain a valid city business registration
certificate.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.220 BUILDING PERMITS AND INSPECTION.
   Prior to commencing operations, and at all times thereafter, a commercial
cannabis business shall be subject to a mandatory building inspection, and must
obtain all required permits and approvals which would otherwise be required for
any business of the same size and intensity operating in that zone. This
includes, but is not limited to, obtaining any required building permit(s),
Fire Department approvals, Health Department approvals and other zoning and
land use permit(s) and approvals. No modifications to the structure of the
premises shall be made without required approvals listed above.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.230 CERTIFICATION FROM THE DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND
HOUSING.
   Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business must obtain a
certification from the Director of Community Development and Housing, or his or
her designee(s), certifying that the business is located on a site that meets
all of the requirements of Title 19.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.10.240 RIGHT TO OCCUPY AND TO USE PROPERTY.
   As a condition precedent to the city’s issuance of a commercial cannabis
business permit pursuant to this chapter, any person intending to open and to
operate a commercial cannabis business shall provide sufficient evidence, which
sufficiency shall be determined in the reasonable discretion of the Mayor and
City Council, of the legal right to occupy and to use the proposed location for
the proposed commercial cannabis activity. In the event the proposed location
will be leased from another person, the applicant shall be required to provide
a signed and notarized statement from all owners of the property, acknowledging
that the property owners have read this chapter and consent to the operation of
the commercial cannabis business on the owner’s property.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.250 LOCATION AND DESIGN OF CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   Commercial cannabis businesses are permitted to engage in commercial
cannabis activities subject to the following zoning and locational
requirements.
   (A)   The commercial cannabis business must be located on property zoned CG
(“Commercial General”), CG-2 (Commercial General-2”), CG-3 (“Commercial
General-3”), CR-2 (“Commercial Regional-Downtown”), CR-3 (“Commercial-Tri-City
Club”), CCS-1 (“Central City South”), CCS-2 (“Central City”), CH (“Commercial
Heavy”), IL (“Industrial Light”), IH (“Industrial Heavy”), OIP (“Office
Industrial Park”) or as such successor zones as may be created by the Mayor and
City Council from time to time, and must meet all of the requirements for
development in these zones.
   (B)   The property on which the cannabis business is located must also meet
all of the distance requirements listed in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(3)
below, unless the Mayor and City Council adopt an ordinance allowing for a
lesser distance. All distances shall be the horizontal distance measured in a
straight line from exterior parcel line to exterior parcel line without regard
to intervening structures, except as listed in division (B)(4) below.
      (1)   The parcel shall be no closer than 600 feet of any residentially
zoned parcel in the city, the city’s sphere of influence, a neighboring
incorporated city or unincorporated county.
      (2)   The parcel shall be no closer than 600 feet from any parcel in the
city, the city’s sphere of influence, a neighboring incorporated city or
unincorporated county containing any of the following:
         (a)   A school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades one
through 12 (whether public, private or charter, including pre-school,
transitional kindergarten and K-12) that is in existence at the time the permit
is issued;
         (b)   A commercial daycare center licensed by the city, another city
or county that is in existence at the time the permit is issued;
         (c)   A youth center that is in existence at the time the permit is
issued; or
         (d)   A park that is in existence at the time the permit is issued.
      (3)   The city shall consider the proximity of the proposed commercial
cannabis business to religious facilities and libraries in existence at the
time the permit is granted when determining whether the issue the permit and
any conditions thereto.
      (4)   For the purposes of this division (B), the distance measurement
shall be without regard to intervening structures, with the exception of the
following, in which case the distance measurement shall be the shortest path of
travel around the listed intervening structures:
         (a)   Freeways;
         (b)   Flood control channels;
         (c)   Railroads; and
         (d)   The Santa Ana River.
   (C)   Each proposed cannabis business project shall:
      (1)   Conform with the city’s general plan, any applicable specific
plans, master plans and design requirements;
      (2)   Comply with all applicable zoning and related development
standards;
      (3)   Be constructed in a manner that minimizes odors to surrounding
uses, and promotes quality design and construction, and consistency with the
surrounding properties;
      (4)   Be adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls,
fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping and all items required for
the development;
      (5)   Be served by highways adequate in width and improved as necessary
to carry the kind and quantity of traffic such use will generate; and
      (6)   Be provided with adequate electricity, sewage, disposal, water,
fire protection and storm drain facilities for the intended purpose.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018; Ord. MC-1519,
passed 7-17-2019)
§ 5.10.260 LIMITATIONS ON CITY’S LIABILITY.
   (A)   To the fullest extent permitted by law, the city shall not assume any
liability whatsoever with respect to having issued a commercial cannabis
business permit pursuant to this chapter or otherwise approving the operation
of any commercial cannabis business.
   (B)   As a condition to the approval of any commercial cannabis business
permit, the applicant shall be required to meet all of the following conditions
before they can receive the commercial cannabis business permit.
      (1)   They must execute an agreement, in a form approved by the City
Attorney, agreeing to indemnify, defend (at applicant’s sole cost and expense)
and hold the city, and its elected officials, officers, employees,
representatives and agents, harmless, from any and all claims, losses, damages,
injuries, liabilities or losses which arise out of, or which are in any way
related to, the city’s issuance of the commercial cannabis business permit, the
city’s decision to approve the operation of the commercial cannabis business or
activity, to the process used by the city in making its decision or the alleged
violation of any federal, state or local laws by the commercial cannabis
business or any of its officers, employees or agents.
      (2)   Maintain insurance at coverage limits, and with conditions thereon
determined necessary and appropriate, from time to time by the City Manager, or
his or her designee.
      (3)   Reimburse the city for all costs and expenses, including, but not
limited to, legal fees and costs and court costs, which the city may be
required to pay as a result of any legal challenge related to the city’s
approval of the applicant’s commercial cannabis business permit, or related to
the city’s approval of a commercial cannabis activity. The city may, at its
sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such
action, but such participation shall not relieve any of the obligations imposed
hereunder.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.270 RECORDS AND RECORD-KEEPING.
   (A)   Each person granted a commercial cannabis business shall maintain
accurate books and records in an electronic format, detailing all of the
revenues and expenses of the business and all of its assets and liabilities. On
no less than an annual basis (at or before the time of the renewal of a
commercial cannabis business permit issued pursuant to this chapter), or at any
time upon reasonable request of the City Manager, or his or her designee, each
commercial cannabis business shall file a sworn statement detailing the number
of sales by the commercial cannabis business during the previous 12-month
period (or shorter period based upon the timing of the request), provided on a
per-month basis. The statement shall also include gross sales for each month,
and all applicable taxes paid or due to be paid, including, but not limited to,
employee withholdings. On an annual basis, each permittee shall submit to the
city a financial audit of the business’s operations conducted by an independent
certified public accountant. At the request of the City Manager, or his or her
designee, each permittee shall provide copies of the last three years of their
local, state and federal tax returns so that the city may verify the
information provided above. Each permittee shall be subject to a regulatory
compliance review and financial audit as determined by the City Manager, or his
or her designee(s).
   (B)   Each person granted a commercial cannabis business shall maintain a
current register of the names and the contact information (including the name,
address and telephone number) of anyone owning or holding an interest in the
commercial cannabis business, and separately of all the officers, managers,
employees and agents currently employed or otherwise engaged by the commercial
cannabis business. The register required by this division (B) shall be provided
to the City Manager, or his or her designee(s), upon a reasonable request.
   (C)   Prior to state licensing, each commercial cannabis business shall
maintain a record of all persons, patients, collectives and primary caregivers
served by the commercial cannabis business for a period of no less than four
years. Once a state license is obtained, the commercial cannabis business must
maintain such records only to the extent permitted or required by the MAUCRSA.
   (D)   All commercial cannabis businesses shall maintain an inventory control
and reporting system that accurately documents the present location, amounts
and descriptions of all cannabis and cannabis products for all stages of the
growing and production or manufacturing, laboratory testing and distribution
processes until purchase as set forth MAUCRSA. Additionally, all commercial
cannabis businesses shall maintain records that identify the source of all
products (company name, location, license numbers and the like).
   (E)   Subject to any restrictions under the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 201 et seq. (“HIPPA”)
regulations, each commercial cannabis business shall allow the city officials
to have access to the business’s books, records, accounts, together with any
other data or documents relevant to its permitted commercial cannabis
activities, for the purpose of conducting an audit or examination. Books,
records, accounts and any and all relevant data or documents will be produced
no later than 24 hours after receipt of the city’s request, unless otherwise
stipulated by the city. The city may require the materials to be submitted in
an electronic format that is compatible with the city’s software and hardware.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.280 SECURITY MEASURES.
   (A)   A commercial cannabis business shall implement sufficient security
measures to deter and prevent the unauthorized entrance into areas containing
cannabis or cannabis products, and to deter and prevent the theft of cannabis
or cannabis products at the commercial cannabis business. Except as may
otherwise be determined by the City Manager, or his or her designee(s), these
security measures shall include, but shall not be limited to, all of the
following:
      (1)   Preventing individuals from remaining on the premises of the
commercial cannabis business if they are not engaging in an activity directly
related to the permitted operations of the commercial cannabis business;
      (2)   Establishing limited access areas accessible only to authorized
commercial cannabis business personnel;
      (3)   Except for live growing plants which are being cultivated at a
cultivation facility, all cannabis and cannabis products shall be stored in a
secured and locked room, safe or vault. All cannabis and cannabis products,
including live plants that are being cultivated, shall be kept in a manner as
to prevent diversion, theft and loss;
      (4)   Installing 24-hour security surveillance cameras of at least HD-
quality to monitor all entrances and exits to and from the premises; all
interior spaces within the commercial cannabis business which are open and
accessible to the public; all interior spaces where cannabis, cash or currency
is being stored for any period of time on a regular basis; and all interior
spaces where diversion of cannabis could reasonably occur. Cameras shall
clearly show each point of sale location, register with a time/date stamp. The
commercial cannabis business shall be responsible for ensuring that the
security surveillance camera’s footage is remotely accessible by the City
Manager, or his or her designee(s), and that it is compatible with the city’s
software and hardware. In addition, remote and real-time, live access to the
video footage from the cameras shall be provided to the City Manager, or his or
her designee(s). Video recordings shall be maintained for a minimum of 120
days, and shall be made available to the City Manager, or his or her designee
(s), upon request. Video shall be of sufficient quality for effective
prosecution of any crime found to have occurred on the site of the commercial
cannabis business;
      (5)   Sensors shall be installed to detect entry and exit from all secure
areas;
      (6)   Panic buttons shall be installed in all commercial cannabis
businesses;
      (7)   Having a professionally installed, maintained and monitored alarm
system. The owner and operator shall be subject to the city’s security alarm
systems requirements of Chapter 8.81;
      (8)   Any bars installed on the windows or the doors of the commercial
cannabis business shall be installed only on the interior of the building as
approved by the Department of Community Development and Housing and Fire
Department;
      (9)   Security personnel shall be on-site 24 hours a day or alternative
security as authorized by the City Manager, or his or her designee(s). Security
personnel must be licensed by the State Bureau of Security and Investigative
Services personnel and shall be subject to the prior review and approval of the
City Manager, or his or her designee(s), with such approval not to be
unreasonably withheld; and
      (10)   Each commercial cannabis business shall have the capability to
remain secure during a power outage and shall ensure that all access doors are
not solely controlled by an electronic access panel to ensure that locks are
not released during a power outage.
   (B)   Each commercial cannabis business shall identify a designated security
representative/liaison to the city, who shall be reasonably available to meet
with the City Manager, or his or her designee(s), regarding any security
related measures or and operational issues. The commercial cannabis business
shall notify the City Manager, or his or her designee, within 24 hours of a
change in designated security representative/liaison.
   (C)   As part of the application and permitting process, each commercial
cannabis business shall have a storage and transportation plan, which
describes, in detail, the procedures for safely and securely storing and
transporting all cannabis, cannabis products and any currency.
   (D)   The commercial cannabis business shall cooperate with the city
whenever the City Manager, or his or her designee(s), makes a request, upon
reasonable notice to the commercial cannabis business, to inspect or audit the
effectiveness of any security plan or of any other requirement of this chapter.
   (E)   A commercial cannabis business shall notify the City Manager, or his
or her designee(s), within 24 hours after discovering any of the following:
      (1)   Significant discrepancies identified during inventory. The level of
significance shall be determined by the regulations promulgated by the City
Manager, or his or her designee(s);
      (2)   Diversion, theft, loss or any criminal activity involving the
commercial cannabis business or any agent or employee of the commercial
cannabis business;
      (3)   The loss or unauthorized alteration of records related to cannabis,
registering qualifying patients, primary caregivers or employees or agents of
the commercial cannabis business; or
      (4)   Any other breach of security.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.10.290 RESTRICTION ON ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO SALES.
   (A)   No person shall cause or permit the sale, dispensing or consumption of
alcoholic beverages to any person, including minors, on or about the property
occupied by the commercial cannabis business.
   (B)   No person shall cause or permit the sale of tobacco products to any
person, including minors, on or about the property occupied by the commercial
cannabis business.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.300 FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   No person may commence or continue any commercial cannabis activity in
the city, without timely paying in full all fees and charges required for the
operation of a commercial cannabis activity. Fees and charges associated with
the operation of a commercial cannabis activity shall be established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council which may be amended from time to
time. Such fees and charges may include, but are not limited to, a regulatory
fee imposed for the reasonable regulatory costs to the city for issuing
licenses and permits; performing investigations, inspections and audits; and
the administrative and criminal enforcement and adjudication thereof.
   (B)   All commercial cannabis businesses authorized to operate under this
chapter shall pay all sales, use, business, employment and other applicable
taxes, and all license, registration and other fees required under federal,
state and local law. Each commercial cannabis business shall cooperate with
city with respect to any reasonable request to audit the commercial cannabis
business’ books and records for the purpose of verifying compliance with this
section, including, but not limited to, a verification of the amount of taxes
required to be paid during any period.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.310 MISCELLANEOUS OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Hours. Commercial cannabis businesses may operate only during the
hours specified in the commercial cannabis business permit issued by the city.
   (B)   On-site consumption. On-site consumption of cannabis is prohibited at
all times by all individuals on the property.
   (C)   Graphics and outdoor storage. No cannabis or cannabis products or
graphics depicting cannabis or cannabis products shall be visible from the
exterior of any property issued a commercial cannabis business permit or on any
of the vehicles owned or used as part of the commercial cannabis business. No
outdoor storage of cannabis or cannabis products is permitted at any time.
   (D)   Reporting and tracking of product and of gross sales. Each commercial
cannabis business shall have in place a point-of-sale or management inventory
tracking system to track and report on all aspects of the commercial cannabis
business, including, but not limited to, such matters as cannabis tracking,
inventory data, gross sales (by weight and by sale), time and date of each sale
and other information which may be deemed necessary by the city. The commercial
cannabis business shall ensure that such information is compatible with the
city’s record-keeping systems. In addition, the system must have the capability
to produce historical transactional data for review. Furthermore, any system
selected must be approved and authorized by the City Manager, or his or her
designee(s), prior to being used by the permittee.
   (E)   State regulations. All cannabis and cannabis products sold,
distributed or manufactured shall be cultivated, manufactured and transported
by licensed facilities that maintain operations in full conformance with the
state and local regulations. No cannabis or cannabis products may be sold,
distributed or transferred out of the state.
   (F)   Physician evaluations nearby prohibited. There shall not be a
physician located in or around any commercial cannabis business at any time for
the purpose of evaluating patients for the issuance of a cannabis
recommendation or card where applicable.
   (G)   Verification for medicinal cannabis. Prior to dispensing medicinal
cannabis or medicinal cannabis products where applicable to any person, the
commercial medicinal cannabis business shall obtain verification from the
recommending physician that the person requesting medicinal cannabis or
medicinal cannabis products is a qualified patient.
   (H)   Emergency contact. Each commercial cannabis business shall provide the
City Manager, or his or her designee(s), with the name, telephone number (both
landline and mobile, if available) of an on-site employee or owner to whom
emergency notice can be provided at any hour of the day. The commercial
cannabis business shall notify the City Manager, or his or her designee, within
24 hours of a change in the emergency contact.
   (I)   Signage and notices.
      (1)   In addition to the requirements otherwise set forth in this
section, business identification signage for a commercial cannabis business
shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 19.22, including, but not limited
to, seeking the issuance of a city sign permit.
      (2)   No signs placed on the premises of a commercial cannabis business
shall obstruct any entrance or exit to the building or any window.
      (3)   Each entrance to a commercial cannabis business shall be visibly
posted with a clear and legible notice indicating that smoking, ingesting or
otherwise consuming cannabis on the premises or in the areas adjacent to the
commercial cannabis business is prohibited.
      (4)   Business identification signage shall be limited to that needed for
identification only and shall not contain any logos or information that
identifies, advertises or lists the services or the products offered. No
commercial cannabis business shall advertise by having a person holding a sign
and advertising the business to passersby, whether such person is on the
premises of the commercial cannabis business or elsewhere, including, but not
limited to, the public right-of-way.
      (5)   In accordance with state law and regulations or as stipulated in
the city commercial cannabis business permit, holders of a commercial cannabis
business permit shall agree that, as an express and ongoing condition of permit
issuance and subsequent renewal, the holder of the permit shall be prohibited
from advertising any commercial cannabis business located in the city utilizing
a billboard (fixed or mobile), bus shelter, placard, aircraft or other similar
forms of advertising anywhere in the state. This division (I)(5) is not
intended to place limitations on the ability of a commercial cannabis business
to advertise in other legally authorized forms, including on the internet, in
magazines or in other similar ways.
   (J)   Minors.
      (1)   Persons under the age of 21 years shall not be allowed on the
premises of a commercial cannabis business and shall not be allowed to serve as
a driver for a mobile delivery service. It shall be unlawful and a violation of
this chapter for any person to employ any person at a commercial cannabis
business who is not at least 21 years of age. Except as provided for under §
5.10.330(C).
      (2)   The entrance to the commercial cannabis business shall be clearly
and legibly posted with a notice that no person under the age of 21 years of
age is permitted to enter upon the premises of the commercial cannabis
business. Except as provided for under §
5.10.330(C).
   (K)   Odor control. Odor control devices and techniques shall be
incorporated in all commercial cannabis businesses to ensure that odors from
cannabis are not detectable off-site. Commercial cannabis businesses shall
provide a sufficient odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust system so that odor
generated inside the commercial cannabis business that is distinctive to its
operation is not detected outside of the facility; anywhere on adjacent
property or public rights-of-way; on or about the exterior or interior common
area walkways, hallways, breezeways, foyers, lobby areas or any other areas
available for use by common tenants or the visiting public; or within any other
unit located inside the same building as the commercial cannabis business. As
such, commercial cannabis businesses must install and maintain the following
equipment, or any other equipment which the Director of Community Development
and Housing, or his or her designee(s), determine is a more effective method or
technology:
      (1)   An exhaust air filtration system with odor control that prevents
internal odors from being emitted externally; and
      (2)   An air system that creates negative air pressure between the
commercial cannabis business’s interior and exterior, so that the odors
generated inside the commercial cannabis business are not detectable on the
outside of the commercial cannabis business.
   (L)   Display of permit and city business license. The original copy of the
commercial cannabis business permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter
and the city issued business license shall be posted inside the commercial
cannabis business in a location readily-visible to the public.
   (M)   Background check. Every person listed as an owner, manager or
supervisor of the commercial cannabis business must submit fingerprints and
other information deemed necessary by the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee(s), for a background check by the City Police Department, pursuant to
Cal. Penal Code, §§ 11105(b)(11) and 13300(b)(11), which authorizes city
authorities to access state and local summary criminal history information for
employment, licensing or certification purposes; and authorizes access to
federal level criminal history information by transmitting fingerprint images
and related information to the Department of Justice to be transmitted to the
Federal Bureau of Investigation. Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code, §§ 11105(b)(11)
and 13300(b)(11), which requires that there be a requirement or exclusion from
employment, licensing or certification based on specific criminal conduct on
the part of the subject of the record, no person shall be issued a permit to
operate a commercial cannabis business unless they have first cleared the
background check, as determined by the Chief of Police, or his or her designee
(s). A fee for the cost of the background investigation, which shall be the
actual cost to the city to conduct the background investigation as it deems
necessary and appropriate, shall be paid at the time the application for a
commercial cannabis business permit is submitted.
   (N)   Loitering. The owner and/or operator of a commercial cannabis business
shall prohibit loitering by persons outside the facility both on the premises
and within 50 feet of the premises.
   (O)   Permits and other approvals. Prior to the establishment of any
commercial cannabis business or the operation of any such business, the person
intending to establish a commercial cannabis business must first obtain all
applicable planning, zoning, building and other applicable permits from the
relevant governmental agency which may be applicable to such commercial
cannabis business.
   (P)   Collective or cooperative. If the commercial cannabis business
permittee is operating as a collective or cooperative under Cal. Health and
Safety Code, § 11362.775(a), the commercial cannabis business shall terminate
the membership of any member violating any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (Q)   Lighting and windows. The interior and exterior of the premises of the
commercial cannabis business shall be well lit at all times. The windows of the
building shall provide an unobstructed view into the interior.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.10.320 OTHER OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The City Manager, or his or her designee, may develop other commercial
cannabis business operational requirements or regulations as are determined to
be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.330 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR RETAILER FACILITIES; DELIVERY.
   (A)   No more than the number of retailers adopted by resolution may operate
within the city at any one time and no more than that number adopted by
resolution shall be issued a permit by the city to operate a retailer at one
time. Both retailers offering storefront purchase (customers purchase and
obtain cannabis on-site) and retailers offering delivery only shall be
permitted. Each shall be required to maintain a physical location from which
commercial cannabis activities are conducted that are permitted under this
chapter.
   (B)   Retailers may only deliver to customers within a county or city that
does not expressly prohibit delivery by ordinance. Retailers may only deliver
to customers within the city after obtaining a commercial cannabis business
permit issued under the chapter. Security plans developed pursuant to this
chapter shall include provisions relating to vehicle security and the
protection of employees and product during loading and in transit.
   (C)   M-licensee retailers must verify the age and all necessary
documentation of each customer to ensure the customer is not under the age of
18 years and that the potential customer has a valid doctor’s recommendation.
A-licensee retailers must verify the age of customers to ensure persons under
the age of 21 are not permitted.
   (D)   Entrances into the retailer shall be locked at all times with entry
strictly controlled. A “buzz-in” electronic/mechanical entry system shall be
utilized to limit access to and entry to the retailer to separate it from the
reception/lobby area.
   (E)   Uniformed licensed security personnel shall be employed to monitor
site activity, to control loitering and site access and to serve as a visual
deterrent to unlawful activities.
   (F)   Retailers may have only that quantity of cannabis and cannabis
products reasonably anticipated to meet the daily demand readily available for
sale on-site in the publically accessible retail sales area of the retailer.
   (G)   All restroom facilities shall remain locked and under the control of
management.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.340 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL CULTIVATION FACILITIES.
   (A)   All outdoor (i.e., open air) cultivation is prohibited. The
cultivation of all cannabis must occur indoors or within mixed light
structures.
   (B)   In no case shall cannabis plants be discernable from a public or
private road, sidewalk, park or any common public viewing area.
   (C)   A permittee permitted to engage in commercial cannabis cultivation in
the city shall only be allowed to cultivate the square feet of canopy space
permitted by state law.
   (D)   Cannabis cultivation shall be conducted in accordance with state and
local laws related to land conversion, grading, electricity, water usage, water
quality, woodland and riparian habitat protection, agricultural discharges and
similar matters.
   (E)   Pesticides and fertilizers shall be properly labeled and stored to
avoid contamination through erosion, leakage or inadvertent damage from pests,
rodents or other wildlife.
   (F)   The cultivation of cannabis shall, at all times, be operated in such a
way as to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the public, the employees
working at the commercial cannabis business, visitors to the area, neighboring
properties and the end users of the cannabis being cultivated; to protect the
environment from harm to streams, fish and wildlife; to ensure the security of
the cannabis being cultivated; and to safeguard against the diversion of
cannabis.
   (G)   All applicants for a cannabis cultivation permit shall submit the
following in addition to the information generally otherwise required for a
commercial cannabis business:
      (1)   A cultivation and operations plan that meets or exceeds minimum
legal standards for water usage, conservation and use; drainage, runoff and
erosion control; watershed and habitat protection; and proper storage of
fertilizers, pesticides and other regulated products to be used on the parcel,
and a description of the cultivation activities (indoor, mixed-light) and
schedule of activities during each month of growing and harvesting, or
explanation of growth cycles and anticipated harvesting schedules for all-
season harvesting (indoor, mixed-light);
      (2)   A description of a legal water source, irrigation plan and
projected water use;
      (3)   Identification of the source of electrical power and plan for
compliance with applicable Building Codes and related codes; and
      (4)   Plan for addressing odor and other public nuisances that may derive
from the cultivation site.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.350 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING LABS.
   (A)   Testing labs shall be required to conduct all testing in a manner
pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code, §§ 26100 et seq., and shall be
subject to state and local law. Each testing lab shall be subject to additional
regulations as determined from time to time as more regulations are developed
under this chapter and any subsequent state legislation regarding the same.
   (B)   Testing labs shall conduct all testing in a manner consistent with
general requirements for the competence of testing and calibrations activities,
including sampling using verified methods.
   (C)   Testing labs shall obtain and maintain ISO/IEC 17025 accreditation as
required by the Bureau.
   (D)   Testing labs shall destroy any harvest batch whose testing sample
indicates non-compliance with health and safety standards required by the
Bureau, unless remedial measures can bring the cannabis or cannabis products
into compliance with quality standards as specified by law and implemented by
the Bureau.
   (E)   Each operator of a testing lab shall ensure that any testing lab
employee takes the sample of cannabis or cannabis products from the
distributor’s premises for testing as required by state law and that the
testing lab employee transports the sample to the testing lab.
   (F)   Except as provided by state law, a testing lab shall not acquire or
receive cannabis or cannabis products except from a licensee in accordance with
state law, and shall not distribute, sell or dispense cannabis or cannabis
products from the licensed premises from which the cannabis or cannabis
products were acquired or received. All transfer or transportation shall be
performed pursuant to a specified chain of custody protocol.
   (G)   A testing lab may receive and test samples of cannabis or cannabis
products from a qualified patient or primary caregiver only if the qualified
patient or primary caregiver presents the qualified patient’s valid physician’s
recommendation for cannabis for medicinal purpose. A testing lab shall not
certify samples from a qualified patient or primary caregiver for resale or
transfer to another party or licensee. All tests performed by a testing lab for
a qualified patient or primary caregiver shall be recorded with the name of the
qualified patient or primary caregiver and the amount of the cannabis or
cannabis products received.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.360 CANNABIS MANUFACTURING: EDIBLES AND OTHER CANNABIS PRODUCTS; SALE OR
DISTRIBUTION OF EDIBLE AND OTHER CANNABIS PRODUCTS.
   (A)   In addition to any locational restrictions contained within this
chapter, manufacturers requiring a Type-6 or Type-7 or any subsequent created
manufacturing state license (using non-volatile and volatile solvents), as
defined in MAUCRSA, may only be permitted to operate within those zone
districts as similar manufacturing activities under Title 19.
   (B)   Any compressed gases used in the manufacturing process shall not be
stored on any property within the city in containers that exceeds the amount
which is approved by Fire Department and authorized by the commercial cannabis
business permit. Each site or parcel subject to a commercial cannabis business
permit shall be limited to a total number of tanks as authorized by the Fire
Department on the property at any time.
   (C)   Manufacturers may use the hydrocarbons N-butane, isobutane, propane or
heptane or other solvents or gases exhibiting low to minimal potential human
related toxicity approved by both the Department of Community Development and
Housing and Fire Department. These solvents must be of at least 99% purity and
any extraction process must use them in a professional grade closed loop
extraction system designed to recover the solvents and work in an environment
with proper ventilation, controlling all sources of ignition where a flammable
atmosphere is or may be present.
   (D)   If an extraction process uses a professional grade closed loop CO2 gas
extraction system, every vessel must be certified by the manufacturer for its
safe use as referenced in division (F) below. The CO2 must be of at least 99%
purity.
   (E)   Closed loop systems for compressed gas extraction systems must be
commercially manufactured and bear a permanently affixed and visible serial
number.
   (F)   Certification from an engineer licensed by the state must be provided
to the Department of Community Development and Housing for a professional grade
closed loop system used by any commercial cannabis manufacturing manufacturer
to certify that the system was commercially manufactured, is safe for its
intended use and was built to codes of recognized and generally accepted good
engineering practices, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (“ASME”);
      (2)   American National Standards Institute (“ANSI”);
      (3)   Underwriters Laboratories (“UL”); or
      (4)   The American Society for Testing and Materials (“ASTM”).
   (G)   The certification document must contain the signature and stamp of the
professional engineer and serial number of the extraction unit being certified.
   (H)   Professional closed loop systems, other equipment used, the extraction
operation and facilities must be approved for their use by the Fire Department
and meet any required Fire, Safety and Building Code requirements specified in
the California Building Referenced Standards Codes.
   (I)   Manufacturers may use heat, screens, presses, steam distillation, ice
water and other methods without employing solvents or gases to create keef,
hashish, bubble hash or infused dairy butter, or oils or fats derived from
natural sources, and other extracts.
   (J)   Manufacturers may use food grade glycerin, ethanol and propylene
glycol solvents to create or refine extracts. Ethanol should be removed from
the extract in a manner to recapture the solvent and ensure that it is not
vented into the atmosphere.
   (K)   Manufacturers creating cannabis extracts must develop standard
operating procedures, good manufacturing practices and a training plan prior to
producing extracts for the marketplace.
   (L)   Any person using solvents or gases in a closed looped system to create
cannabis extracts must be fully trained on how to use the system, have direct
access to applicable material safety data sheets and handle and store solvents
and gases safely.
   (M)   Parts per million for one gram of finished extract cannot exceed state
standards for any residual solvent or gas when quality assurance tested.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.10.370 PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS, STANDARDS AND OTHER LEGAL DUTIES.
   (A)   In addition to any regulations adopted by the Mayor and City Council,
the City Manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to establish, subject
to approval by the Mayor and City Council, any additional rules, regulations
and standards governing the issuance, denial or renewal of commercial cannabis
business permits the ongoing operation of commercial cannabis businesses and
the city’s oversight, or concerning any other subject determined to be
necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   (B)   Regulations shall be published on the city’s website.
   (C)   Regulations promulgated by the City Manager, or his or her designee,
shall become effective upon date of publication. Commercial cannabis businesses
shall be required to comply with all state and local laws and regulations,
including, but not limited to, any rules, regulations or standards adopted by
the City Manager, or his or her designee.
   (D)   Testing labs and distribution facilities shall be subject to state law
and shall be subject to additional regulations as determined, from time to
time, as more regulations are developed under §
5.10.350(A) and any subsequent state legislation regarding the same.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.380 COMMUNITY RELATIONS.
   (A)   Each commercial cannabis business shall provide the name, telephone
number and e-mail address of a community relations contact to whom notice of
problems associated with the commercial cannabis business can be provided. Each
commercial cannabis business shall also provide the above information to all
businesses and residences located within 100 feet of the commercial cannabis
business. The commercial cannabis business shall notify the City Manager, or
his or her designee, within 24 hours of a change in community relations
contact.
   (B)   During the first year of operation pursuant to this chapter, the
owner, manager and community relations representative from each commercial
cannabis business holding a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall attend
meetings with the City Manager, or his or her designee(s), and other interested
parties as deemed appropriate by the City Manager, or his or her designee(s),
to discuss costs, benefits and other community issues arising as a result of
implementation of this chapter. After the first year of operation, the owner,
manager and community relations representative from each such commercial
cannabis business shall meet with the City Manager, or his or her designee(s),
when and as requested by the City Manager, or his or her designee(s).
   (C)   Commercial cannabis businesses to which a permit is issued pursuant to
this chapter shall develop a city approved public outreach and educational
program for youth organizations and educational institutions that outlines the
risks of youth addiction to cannabis, and that identifies resources available
to youth related to drugs and drug addiction.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.390 FEES DEEMED DEBT TO THE CITY.
   The amount of any fee, cost or charge imposed pursuant to this chapter shall
be deemed a debt to the city that is recoverable via an authorized
administrative process as set forth by ordinance or in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.400 PERMITTEE RESPONSIBLE FOR VIOLATIONS.
   The person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
responsible for all violations of the laws of the state or of the regulations
and/or the ordinances of the city, whether committed by the permittee or any
employee or agent of the permittee, which violations occur in or about the
premises of the commercial cannabis business whether or not said violations
occur within the permittee’s presence.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.410 INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The City Manager, Chief of Police or designee of either of them
charged with enforcing the provisions of this chapter, or any provision
thereof, may enter the location of a commercial cannabis business at any time,
without notice, and inspect the location of any commercial cannabis business as
well as any recordings and records required to be maintained pursuant to this
chapter or under applicable provisions of state law.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, having responsibility over the
operation of a commercial cannabis business, to impede, obstruct, interfere
with or otherwise not to allow the city to conduct an inspection, review or
copy records, recordings or other documents required to be maintained by a
commercial cannabis business under this chapter or under state or local law. It
is also unlawful for a person to conceal, destroy, deface, damage or falsify
any records, recordings or other documents required to be maintained by a
commercial cannabis business under this chapter or under state or local law.
   (C)   The City Manager, Chief of Police or designee of either of them
charged with enforcing the provisions of this chapter may enter the location of
a commercial cannabis business at any time during the hours of operation and
without notice to obtain samples of the cannabis to test for public safety
purposes. Any samples obtained by the city shall be logged, recorded and
maintained in accordance with established procedures by the City Police
Department or regulations adopted pursuant to the authority of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.420 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REGULATION.
   It is the stated intent of this chapter to regulate commercial cannabis
activity in the city in compliance with all provisions MAUCRSA and any
subsequent state legislation.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.425 INTEGRITY PROVISION.
   (A)   All applicants listed on an application for a commercial cannabis
business permit or any persons representing or lobbying on their behalf shall
comply with the integrity standards adopted by separate resolution of the City
Council. Failure to abide by the integrity standards may result in
disqualification from a commercial cannabis business (“CCB”) permit review
process or revocation if it is later determined that the applicant or any
person associated with the application or any third party lobbying on their
behalf has violated the standards.
   (B)   Prior to voting on the approval of an application of any kind related
to a commercial cannabis business (“CCB”) permit, all members of the City
Council shall disclose, in public, immediately before the vote, whether they
have had any communications directly or through an intermediary with the CCB
applicant or a representative of or a lobbyist for a CCB applicant.
(Ord. MC-1547, passed 10-21-2020)
§ 5.10.430 VIOLATIONS DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter is deemed
unlawful and a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the City Manager,
Chief of Police or designee of either of them. The city may recover any
nuisance abatement costs and/or administrative fines relating to such
violations in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 38773.1 and 38773.5 in
accordance with Chapter 8.30.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.440 EACH VIOLATION A SEPARATE OFFENSE.
   Each and every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures
authorized by the city. Additionally, as a nuisance per se, any violation of
this chapter shall be subject to injunctive relief, any permit issued pursuant
to this chapter being deemed null and void, disgorgement and payment to the
city for any monies unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement, costs of
investigation, attorney fees and any other relief or remedy available at law or
in equity. The city may also pursue any and all remedies and actions available
and applicable under state and local laws for any violations committed by the
commercial cannabis business or persons related to, or associated with, the
commercial cannabis activity. Additionally, when there is determined to be an
imminent threat to public health, safety or welfare, the City Manager, Chief of
Police or designee of either of them may take immediate action to temporarily
suspend a commercial cannabis business permit issued by the city, pending a
hearing before the City Manager, or his or her designee(s).
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.450 CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   Any person causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing a
violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and may, in the
discretion of the City Attorney, be prosecuted as a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment in the
city or county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. The City Attorney, in his or her sound discretion, may
prosecute a violation of this chapter as an infraction, rather than a
misdemeanor, or reduce or agree to the reduction of a previously filed
misdemeanor to an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction under this
provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100 for
the first violation, a fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation within
one year and a fine not exceeding $500 for a third violation within one year. A
fourth violation of this chapter within one year shall be charged as a
misdemeanor and may not be reduced to an infraction. Each day a violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 5.10.460 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE AND NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided herein are not to be construed as exclusive remedies.
The city is authorized to pursue any proceedings or remedies provided by law.
(Ord. MC-1464, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1503, passed 9-5-2018)
CHAPTER 5.12: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1050, passed 7-12-1999; Ord. MC-1051, passed 7-19-1999;
Ord. MC-1052, passed 7-19-1999)
CHAPTER 5.14: ENTERTAINMENT - DANCES AND ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
Section
   
5.14.010   Definitions
   
5.14.020   License - required
   
5.14.030   License - application and fees
   
5.14.040   Application requirements
   
5.14.050   Issue of license - investigation
   
5.14.060   Operational standards
   
5.14.070   License - non-transferable - posting
   
5.14.080   License - fee
   
5.14.090   License - duration
   
5.14.100   Exemptions from filing, processing and license fees
   
5.14.110   Suspension/revocation of license
   
5.14.120   Appeal
   
5.14.130   Licenses and fees not exclusive
   
5.14.140   Exceptions
   
5.14.150   Severability
   
5.14.160   Violations and penalties
§ 5.14.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DINE AND DANCE CLUBS and NIGHT CLUBS. All hotels, restaurants, cafés, road
houses, inns, taverns, bars or any place open to the public, wherein or whereat
beverages, meals or dinners are served, and where the public and patrons
thereof may dance, or where entertainers may perform.
   ENTERTAINMENT.
      (1)   Any act, play, review, pantomime, scene, dance act, song and dance
act, concert or gathering and playing of band(s) and/or musical groups,
performed by one or more persons, whether or not such person or persons are
compensated for such performance, when the same is performed at a public dance
hall, public dance, dancing club, dine and dance club or night club;
      (2)   Any fashion or style show, except:
         (a)   When the same is conducted by a non-profit club, organization or
association, as a part of the social activities of such club, organization or
association to which members of the general public are not invited; or
         (b)   When the same is conducted by a person as a part of a commercial
business which primarily involves the sale or manufacture of clothing or
wearing apparel.
      (3)   The following is included in the term ENTERTAINMENT: the presence
of any performer, dancer, employee, agent, model or other person, collectively
and/or individually referred to as entertainer, in any place of ENTERTAINMENT,
as defined in this section, who engages in any “specified sexual activity” (as
that term is defined in Chapter 19.06) not otherwise prohibited by local, state
or federal law, or who exposes any specified anatomical part (as that term is
defined in Chapter 19.06) not otherwise prohibited by local, state or federal
law, or who performs in attire commonly referred to as pasties or a G-string,
or any other opaque covering which does not expose the areola or nipples of the
female breast, and while covering the natal cleft and pubic area covers less
than one inch on either side of the entire length of the natal cleft and two
inches across the pubic area. ENTERTAINMENT, as described in this definition,
shall be subject to all regulations as described in Chapter 19.06, including,
but not limited to, the requirement for a development permit II.
   LICENSE. A license required and issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
   NOTICE. Written notice, given by personal service upon the addressee or
given by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be
notified at his or her last known address. Service of such NOTICE shall be
effective upon the completion of personal service or upon the placing of the
same in the custody of the United States Postal Service.
   PUBLIC DANCE, DANCING CLUB or PUBLIC DANCE HALL. Any place open to the
public wherein or whereat the public may engage in dancing as a result of the
entertainment provided, including places and dances where admission thereto is
by membership or other special privilege.
(Ord. MC-1100, passed 7-24-2001; Ord. MC-1129, passed 8-20-2002)
§ 5.14.020 LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association of
persons to operate, conduct or carry on any act of entertainment, public dance
hall, public dance, dancing club, dine and dance club or night club, as the
same are defined in §
5.14.010, without first obtaining a license to do so as provided in this
chapter.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the first sentence of this section, the requirements
of this chapter do not apply to not-for-profit I.R.C. § 501(c)(3) religious
organizations, religious assemblies or institutions or the religious exercise
of a person, or to schools, school districts and/or institutions of higher
learning.
(Ord. MC-1100, passed 7-24-2001)
§ 5.14.030 LICENSE - APPLICATION AND FEES.
   Any person required to obtain a license pursuant to this chapter shall file
a written application therefor with the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by
a fee established by resolution of the City Council which shall be no more than
necessary to cover the costs of processing and investigation.
§ 5.14.040 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The following information shall be submitted to the City Clerk by the owner
at the time of applying for a license:
   (A)   A description of all proposed entertainment business activities and
anticipated occupancy;
   (B)   A site plan describing the building and/or unit proposed for the
entertainment establishment, a fully dimensioned interior floor plan and the
following information:
      (1)   Entry program. For each type of event, the entry program will
describe how patrons will enter the entertainment establishment, including a
map of the proposed waiting line, estimated length of time a waiting line will
exist, security searches or identification verification at entrance;
      (2)   Map showing parking and loading areas. An area plan shall be
submitted identifying parking areas to be used by customers, including the
number of spaces available and loading areas to be used by the entertainers;
      (3)   Security company staffing and equipment. For each type of event,
the number of security guards, their responsibilities and equipment to be used;
      (4)   Maintenance provisions. For each type of event, the need and number
of trash receptacles, crowd control barriers and sanitation facilities;
      (5)   Clean-up provisions. For each type of event, description of the
need for and provision of area clean-up; and
      (6)   Noise control provisions. For each type of event, description of
how the noise standards of this chapter shall be met.
   (C)   The application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The owner’s name, residence street address and mailing address, if
different, and state driver’s license number and any and all aliases;
      (2)   The name under which the entertainment enterprise is to be
operated;
      (3)   The telephone number of the enterprise and the address and legal
description of the parcel of land on which the enterprise is located;
      (4)   The date on which the owner acquired the enterprise for which the
license is sought, and the date on which the enterprise began or will begin
operations at the location for which the license is sought; and
      (5)   If the enterprise is owned and/or operated by a corporation, or
other limited liability entity, or association of persons, the name of each
officer and/or director of the corporation, limited liability entity or
association of persons. If the enterprise is owned and or operated by a
partnership, the name of each general partner of the partnership;
   (D)   A statement under oath that the owner has personal knowledge of the
information contained in the application and the information contained is true
and correct;
   (E)   A statement that the owner has read and understands the provisions of
this chapter;
   (F)   A statement whether the owner previously operated in this or any other
county, city or state under an entertainment establishment license/permit or
similar business license, and whether the owner has ever had a license revoked
or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business entity or trade name
under which the owner operated that was subject to the suspension or
revocation; and
   (G)   If the premises are being rented or leased or being purchased under
contract, a copy of such lease or contract shall accompany the application.
(Ord. MC-1100, passed 7-24-2001)
§ 5.14.050 ISSUE OF LICENSE - INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Application approval process.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for an entertainment license, the
City Clerk shall conduct an investigation to determine if the proposed business
is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The investigation shall
include immediately forwarding copies of the application to the Police
Department, Development Services and the Fire Department for its own
independent investigation. Each department shall make recommendations as to the
issuance or denial of the license and forward said results to the City Clerk
within 20 days of receipt of the application. The City Clerk shall, within 30
days of receipt of a complete license application, approve and issue the
license if all the requirements of this section have been met. If the City
Clerk determines that the application does not satisfy the requirements of this
chapter, he or she shall deny the application. If no determination is made by
the City Clerk within 30 days of receipt of a complete license application,
then the applicant may commence operations under a temporary license, subject
to strict compliance with this chapter, until the City Clerk’s determination.
      (2)   The applicant shall be served with written notice of the decision.
Notice shall be personally served or served by deposit in the United States
mail, first class postage prepaid, at the address shown on the application.
Service shall be deemed complete upon personal service or deposit in the United
States post mail.
   (B)   Standards for approval of license. The City Clerk shall approve and
issue an entertainment license if the application and evidence submitted show
that:
      (1)   The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would
comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city’s
building, fire, zoning and health regulations; and
      (2)   The applicant has not knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of fact in the license application process, or on any
document required by the city in conjunction therewith; the applicant’s age is
18 years or more; and the applicant has paid the required application fees.
(Ord. MC-1100, passed 7-24-2001; Ord. MC-1129, passed 8-20-2002)
§ 5.14.060 OPERATIONAL STANDARDS.
   The following operational standards shall apply to all entertainment
described in §
5.14.010.
   (A)   No operator, entertainer or employee of a place of entertainment shall
permit to be performed, offer to perform, perform or allow patrons to perform
sexual intercourse, oral or anal copulation, lap or straddle dancing, fondling
or stimulation of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts.
   (B)   No operator, entertainer or employee of a place of entertainment shall
encourage or permit any person upon the premises to lap or straddle dance,
touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any other
person.
   (C)   If the place of entertainment is licensed to serve alcoholic
beverages, the licensee shall abide by the rules and regulations set forth by
the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
   (D)   No person shall perform for patrons any entertainment described in §
5.14.010 except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the level of the floor
which is separated by a distance of at least six feet from the nearest area
occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within six feet of the
stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. This division (D) shall
not apply to individual viewing areas where the stage is completely separated
from the viewing area, floor to ceiling, by plexiglass or other clear permanent
barrier.
   (E)   Stage or entertainment areas shall not be open to view from outside
the premises.
   (F)   Permanent barriers shall be installed and maintained to screen the
interior of the premises from public view for each door used as an entrance/
exit to the business.
   (G)   No exterior door or window shall be propped or kept open at any time
during hours of operation; any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque
covering at all times.
   (H)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted within the
premises at any time during hours of operation.
   (I)   The place of entertainment shall maintain separate restroom facilities
for male patrons and employees and female patrons and employees. Male patrons
and employees shall be prohibited from either looking into or using the
restrooms for females and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from
using the restrooms for males except to carry out the duties of repair,
maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. Restrooms shall not
contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection
recording or reproduction equipment.
   (J)   The premises shall provide separate dressing room facilities for male
and female entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainer’s
use.
   (K)   The licensee shall provide an entrance/exit to the premises for
entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.
   (L)   No entertainer shall have physical contact with any patron and no
patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer while on the premises.
   (M)   All areas of the place of entertainment accessible to patrons shall be
illuminated at least to the extent of two foot-candles (measured as units of
illuminance), minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level.
   (N)   Individual viewing areas shall be operated and maintained without any
hole or other opening or means of direct communication or visual or physical
access between the interior space of two or more individual viewing areas.
   (O)   No individual viewing area may be occupied by more than one person at
any one time.
   (P)   All individual viewing areas shall be physically arranged in such a
manner that the entire interior portion of the individual viewing area is
directly visible from aisles and public areas of the premises. Visibility into
the individual viewing rooms shall not be blocked or obscured by doors,
curtains, partitions, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever.
   (Q)   No patron, guest or invitee shall directly pay or give any gratuity to
any performer, dancer, employee or model and no dancer, performer, employee or
model shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
   (R)   No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult
business (as that term is defined in Chapter 19.06) shall permit any person on
the premises of the adult business to engage in a live showing of the human
male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque
covering, and/or the female breasts with less than a fully opaque covering over
any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque
covering simulating the appearance of the specific anatomical part required to
be covered.
   (S)   (1)   If the occupancy limit of that portion of the premises where
entertainment is performed is greater than 200 persons, at least one security
guard will be on duty outside the premises, patrolling the grounds and parking
areas at all times while the entertainment is provided. An additional security
guard will be on duty inside the premises if the occupancy exceeds 400 persons.
      (2)   The security guards shall be charged with preventing violations of
law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of the chapter.
No security guard required pursuant to this division (S)(2) shall act as a door
person, ticket seller, ticket taker or admittance person while acting as a
security guard. An additional security guard shall be provided if one security
guard is to be utilized for the purpose of conducting searches on patrons. All
security guards shall be licensed in accordance with Cal. Business and
Professions Code, §§ 7582 et seq.
   (T)   The premises within which the entertainment is located shall provide
sufficient sound absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside the
premises shall not be audible anywhere on adjacent property or public right-of-
way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same
building.
   (U)   All signage conforms to the standards applicable in Title 19.
   (V)   Every place of entertainment shall have a manager on the premises at
all times when entertainment is performed.
   (W)   The place of entertainment must not operate or be open between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.; however, the restriction herein imposed
applies only to permitting or allowing the public to dance and to the providing
of entertainment of any sort other than mechanical music between such hours and
is not deemed to prevent or make unlawful the serving of meals or refreshments
between such hours.
   (X)   All business activities must take place within the enclosed
structures, unless otherwise permitted by the city.
   (Y)   The City Clerk shall impose conditions prior to approval of an
application which are deemed necessary by the Police Department, Development
Services and the Fire Department to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this chapter or to protect the public health and safety. Such conditions shall
be limited to the following: hours of operation; maximum occupancy; fire and
life and public safety issues; fire suppression; exterior signage prohibiting
loitering and littering; clean-up of premises; location of the business; amount
and type of calls for police service in the area; exterior lighting; existence
of public telephones; and security guards. The conditions imposed shall include
the posting of a bond or cash equivalent for the clean-up of premises,
dependent upon the physical condition of past premises as a result of past
entertainment events of applicant.
(Ord. MC-1129, passed 8-20-2002)
§ 5.14.070 LICENSE - NON-TRANSFERABLE - POSTING.
   No entertainment establishment license shall be sold, transferred or
assigned by any license holder, or by operation of law, to any other person,
group, partnership, corporation or any other entity, and any such sale,
transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be
deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license
shall be thereafter null and void. A license held by an individual in the name
of a corporation or partnership is subject to the same rules of transferability
as contained above. License shall be valid only for the exact location
specified in the permit. Each license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
or upon the premises for which it is issue and shall be shown to any city
official upon demand.
§ 5.14.080 LICENSE - FEE.
   (A)   For every person, firm, corporation or association of persons
conducting, operating, managing or carrying on a public dance, dance hall,
dancing club, dine and dance club or night club as the same are defined in §
5.14.010, the license fee shall be at the rate set by resolution adopted by the
Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   Every person, firm, corporation or association of persons operating,
conducting or carrying on a public dance where the owner, manager or operator
does not operate, conduct or carry on a public dance at least one night in each
month shall pay a license fee at the rate set by resolution adopted by the
Mayor and City Council.
§ 5.14.090 LICENSE - DURATION.
   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of one
year or until revoked or abandoned.
§ 5.14.100 EXEMPTIONS FROM FILING, PROCESSING AND LICENSE FEES.
   A bona fide church, non-profit organization or charitable organization
recognized as such under state law, bona fide lodge, fraternal organization or
fraternal society which carries on such dances solely for the amusement or
entertainment of its bona fide members, or for the purpose of securing funds
for such organization for its own operating needs or for charitable purposes,
shall be exempt from payment of filing, processing and license fees.
§ 5.14.110 SUSPENSION/REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The City Clerk shall suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions
of this chapter for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   The licensee has ceased to meet the requirements for issuance of
license;
   (B)   The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or misleading
information on the application;
   (C)   The operation, as conducted by the licensee, does not comply with all
applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city’s building, fire,
zoning and health regulations;
   (D)   Excessively loud music or noise from the establishment for which the
permit was issued interferes with the peace and quiet of the neighborhood;
   (E)   The place of entertainment has been operated in violation of any of
the requirements of this chapter;
   (F)   The license holder is convicted of a felony or misdemeanor occurring
upon, or relating to the premises or lot upon which the place of entertainment
is located which offense is classified by the state as an offense involving any
sexual crime against children, sexual abuse, rape, distribution of obscene
material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including,
but not necessarily limited to, the violation of any crime requiring
registration under Cal. Penal Code, § 290, or any violation of Cal. Penal Code,
§§ 243.3, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286,
286.5, 287, 288, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 315, 316 or 647; or
   (G)   If any person or persons is (are) convicted of a felony or misdemeanor
for an offense set forth in division (F) above as a result of such person’s
activity on the premises or property on which the place of entertainment is
located, and the person or persons were employees, contractors or agents of the
place of entertainment at the time the offenses were committed.
§ 5.14.120 APPEAL.
   (A)   Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the City Clerk with
reference to the issuance, conditional issuance, denial, suspension or
revocation of a license may appeal to the hearing officer for the city. The
hearing officer shall be appointed by the Mayor to hear all appeals under this
section for a fixed term not to exceed two years; after which, such hearing
officer shall be ineligible for reappointment until after one year has passed.
Upon the timely filing of an appeal from the denial, suspension or revocation
of a license, the decision of the City Clerk is stayed until the appeal is
decided by the hearing officer.
   (B)   The right to appeal to the hearing officer from the denial, suspension
or revocation of any license required by this chapter shall terminate upon the
expiration of 15 days following the deposit of a certified letter in the United
States Post Office advising the applicant of the action of the City Clerk and
of his or her right to appeal such action to the hearing officer.
   (C)   The hearing shall be held within 20 days of the receipt by the City
Clerk of the appeal, or at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the hearing
officer, whichever is sooner.
   (D)   The hearing officer shall render his or her decision within five days
from the conclusion of the hearing. Said decision shall be sent by certified
mail. The City Clerk or any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the hearing
officer shall have the right to appeal to the City Planning Commission. Upon
the timely filing of an appeal, the decision of the hearing officer is stayed
until the appeal is decided by the Planning Commission. The right to appeal to
the City Planning Commission shall terminate upon the expiration of 15 days
following the deposit of said decision by certified mail and advising the
applicant of his or her right to appeal such decision to the City Planning
Commission. The appeal hearing before the City Planning Commission shall be
held within 20 days of the receipt by the City Clerk of the appeal request. The
Planning Commission shall render its decision within 14 days from the
conclusion of the hearing. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be
final and conclusive and shall not be subject to appeal to the Mayor and City
Council. Pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, § 1094.8, any action to
review the decision of the Planning Commission shall be filed and served not
later than 21 calendar days following the Planning Commission’s decision unless
the parties jointly waive the time limit.
   (E)   The city shall comply with all of the requirements of Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure, § 1094.8 and shall take all lawful steps to ensure that any
applicant aggrieved by its decision shall be afforded prompt judicial review of
said Planning Commission’s decision.
(Ord. MC-1058, passed 9-21-1999; Ord. MC-1059, passed 10-5-1999; Ord. MC-1129,
passed 8-20-2002)
 
§ 5.14.130 LICENSES AND FEES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   Fees and licenses required by this chapter shall be in addition to any
license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this code.
§ 5.14.140 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply prospectively and shall not
operate to revoke any valid live entertainment license in effect as of the date
of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to require an
entertainment license for the following:
      (1)   For the use of a radio, record player, juke box or television
receiver in any establishment;
      (2)   For the use of a piano or organ in any establishment;
      (3)   For any entertainment provided for members and their guests at a
private club where admission is not open to the public; and
      (4)   For the playing of background music by any electronic means or
instrument in conjunction with the service and consumption of food.
§ 5.14.150 SEVERABILITY.
   In the event that any provision of this chapter, or any part thereof, or any
application thereof to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction on its face or as applied, such holding shall not affect the
validity or effectiveness of any of the remaining provisions of this ordinance,
or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance
or of said provision as applied to any other person or circumstance. It is
declared to be the legislative intent of the city that this chapter would have
been adopted had such unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective provisions not
been included herein.
§ 5.14.160 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates §
5.14.020 is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction in accordance
with §
1.12.010(A). Each and every day during which such person violates §
5.14.020 shall constitute a separate offense chargeable under this section.
(Ord. MC-1052, passed 7-19-1999; Ord. MC-1051, passed 7-19-1999; Ord. MC-1050,
passed 7-12-1999; Ord. MC-1129, passed 8-20-2002)
CHAPTER 5.16: FIRE, REMOVAL OR CLOSING-OUT SALES
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1485, passed 4-18-2018)
Cross-reference:
   For additional provisions and license fees for fire, bankrupt or wreck
sales, see §
5.04.265
CHAPTER 5.18: CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
Section
   
5.18.010   Title
   
5.18.020   Authority and purpose
   
5.18.030   Intent
   
5.18.040   Definitions
   
5.18.050   Tax imposed
   
5.18.060   Reporting and remittance of tax
   
5.18.070   Payments and communications - timely remittance
   
5.18.080   Payment - when taxes deemed delinquent
   
5.18.090   Notice not required by the city
   
5.18.100   Penalties and interest
   
5.18.110   Refunds and credits
   
5.18.120   Refunds and procedures
   
5.18.130   Personal cultivation not taxed
   
5.18.140   Administration of the tax
   
5.18.150   Appeal procedure
   
5.18.160   Enforcement - action to collect
   
5.18.170   Apportionment
   
5.18.180   Constitutionality and legality
   
5.18.190   Audit and examination of premises and records
   
5.18.200   Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees or charges
   
5.18.210   Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business
   
5.18.220   Deficiency determinations
   
5.18.230   Failure to report - non-payment, fraud
   
5.18.240   Tax assessment - notice requirements
   
5.18.250   Tax assessment - hearing, application and determination
   
5.18.260   Relief from taxes - disaster relief
   
5.18.270   Conviction for violation - taxes not waived
   
5.18.280   Violation deemed misdemeanor
   
5.18.290   Severability
   
5.18.300   Remedies cumulative
   
5.18.310   Amendment or repeal
§ 5.18.010 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Cannabis Business Tax Ordinance.”
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.020 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to adopt a tax, for revenue purposes,
pursuant to the Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 37101 and 37100.5, upon cannabis businesses
that engage in business in the city. The cannabis business tax is levied based
upon business gross receipts and square footage of plant canopy. It is not a
sales and use tax, a tax upon income or a tax upon real property.
   (B)   The cannabis business tax is a general tax enacted solely for general
governmental purposes of the city and not for specific purposes. All of the
proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the city’s
General Fund and be available for any legal municipal purpose.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.030 INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is to levy a tax on all cannabis businesses that
operate in the city, regardless of whether such business would have been legal
at the time this chapter was adopted. Nothing in this chapter shall be
interpreted to authorize or permit any business activity that would not
otherwise be legal or permissible under laws applicable to the activity at the
time the activity is undertaken.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Includes all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in
within the city, including any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade,
profession, occupation, vocation, calling or livelihood, whether or not carried
on for gain or profit, but shall not include the services rendered by an
employee to his or her employer.
   CALENDAR YEAR. The 12 consecutive month period from January 1 through the
following December 31, inclusive.
   CANNABIS. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica
or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin,
whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant,
its seeds or resin. CANNABIS also means the separated resin, whether crude or
purified, obtained from CANNABIS. CANNABIS also means marijuana, as defined by
the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11018, and is not limited to medical
cannabis.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS. Any business activity involving cannabis, including, but
not limited to, cultivating, transporting, distributing, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, processing, preparing, storing, packaging, delivering,
testing, dispensing, retailing and wholesaling of cannabis, of cannabis
products or of ancillary products and accessories, whether or not carried on
for gain or profit.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX or BUSINESS TAX. The tax due pursuant to this chapter
for engaging in cannabis business in the city.
   CANNABIS PRODUCT. Raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the raw
agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, an edible product
or a topical product. CANNABIS PRODUCT also means marijuana products, as
defined by the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11018.1, and is not limited to
medical cannabis products.
   CANOPY. All areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis plant whether
contiguous or non-contiguous on any one site. When plants occupy multiple
horizontal planes (as when plants are placed on shelving above other plants),
each plane shall be counted as a separate CANOPY area.
   CITY PERMIT. A permit issued by the city to a person to authorize that
person to operate or engage in a cannabis business.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION. Cultivation in the course of conducting a
cannabis business.
   CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting,
drying, curing, grading or trimming of cannabis and includes, but is not
limited to, the operation of a nursery.
   EMPLOYEE. Each and every person engaged in the operation or conduct of any
business, whether as owner, member of the owner’s family, partner, associate,
agent, manager or solicitor, and each and every other person employed or
working in such business for a wage, salary, commission, barter or any other
form of compensation.
   ENGAGED IN BUSINESS AS A CANNABIS BUSINESS.
      (1)   The commencing, conducting, operating, managing or carrying on of a
cannabis business, whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent,
manager, employee or otherwise, whether operating from a fixed location in the
city or coming into the city from an outside location to engage in such
activities.
      (2)   A person shall be deemed ENGAGED IN BUSINESS within the city if:
         (a)   Such person or person’s employee maintains a fixed place of
business within the city for the benefit or partial benefit of such person;
         (b)   Such person or person’s employee owns or leases real property
within the city for business purposes;
         (c)   Such person or person’s employee regularly maintains a stock of
tangible personal property in the city for sale in the ordinary course of
business;
         (d)   Such person or person’s employee regularly conducts solicitation
of business within the city; or
         (e)   Such person or person’s employee performs work or renders
services in the city.
      (3)   The foregoing specified activities shall not be a limitation on the
meaning of ENGAGED IN BUSINESS.
   EVIDENCE OF DOING BUSINESS. Evidence such as, without limitation, use of
signs, circulars, cards or any other advertising media, including the use of
internet or telephone solicitation, or representation to a government agency or
to the public that such person is engaged in a cannabis business in the city.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. Except as otherwise specifically provided, means, whether
designated a sales price, royalty, rent, commission, dividend or other
designation, the total amount (including all receipts, cash, credits, services
and property of any kind or nature) received or payable for sales of goods,
wares or merchandise or for the performance of any act or service of any nature
for which a charge is made or credit allowed (whether such service, act or
employment is done as part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares,
merchandise or not), without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of
the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest
paid or payable, losses or any other expense whatsoever. However, the following
shall be excluded from the definition of GROSS RECEIPTS:
      (1)   Cash discounts where allowed and taken on sales;
      (2)   Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase
price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;
      (3)   Such part of the sale price of any property returned by purchasers
to the seller as refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances or
return of refundable deposits previously included in gross receipts;
      (4)   Receipts derived from the occasional sale of used, obsolete or
surplus trade fixtures, machinery or other equipment used by the taxpayer in
the regular course of the taxpayer’s business;
      (5)   Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or
units of the same business;
      (6)   Whenever there are included within the gross receipts amounts which
reflect sales for which credit is extended and such amount proved uncollectible
in a subsequent year, those amounts may be excluded from the gross receipts in
the year they prove to be uncollectible; provided, however, if the whole or
portion of such amounts excluded as uncollectible are subsequently collected,
they shall be included in the amount of gross receipts for the period when they
are recovered;
      (7)   Receipts of refundable deposits, except that such deposits when
forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded when in
excess of $1;
      (8)   Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an
agent or trustee and to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom
collected. These agents or trustees must provide the City Department of Finance
and Management Services with the names and the addresses of the others and the
amounts paid to them. This exclusion shall not apply to any fees, percentages
or other payments retained by the agent or trustees; and
      (9)   Retail sales of t-shirts; sweaters; hats; stickers; key chains;
bags; books; posters; rolling papers; cannabis accessories, such as pipes, pipe
screens; vape pen batteries (without cannabis); or other personal tangible
property which the Tax Administrator has excluded in writing by issuing an
administrative ruling per §
5.18.140 shall not be subject to the cannabis business tax under this chapter.
However, any business activities not subject to this chapter as a result of the
administrative ruling shall be subject to the appropriate business tax
provisions of
Chapter 5.04 or any other chapter or title as determined by the Tax
Administrator.
   LIGHTING. A source of light that is primarily used for promoting the
biological process of plant growth. LIGHTING does not include sources of light
that primarily exist for the safety or convenience of staff or visitors to the
facility, such as emergency lighting, walkway lighting or light admitted via
small skylights, windows or ventilation openings.
   NURSERY. A facility or part of a facility that is used only for producing
clones, immature plants, seeds and other agricultural products used
specifically for the planting, propagation and cultivation of cannabis.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, whether
organized as a non-profit or for-profit entity, and includes the plural as well
as the singular number.
   SALE. Any sale, exchange or barter.
   STATE. The State of California.
   STATE LICENSE, LICENSE or REGISTRATION. A state license issued pursuant to
the Cal. Business and Professions Code, §§ 26050 et seq. or other applicable
state law.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Director of Finance and Management Services of the
City of San Bernardino, or his or her designee.
   TESTING LABORATORY. A cannabis business that:
      (1)   Offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products;
      (2)   Offers no service other than such tests;
      (3)   Sells no products, excepting only testing supplies and materials;
      (4)   Is accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all
other persons involved in the cannabis industry in the state; and
      (5)   Is registered with the Bureau of Cannabis Control.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.18.050 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   Beginning January 1, 2019, there is imposed upon each person who is
engaged in business as a cannabis business, a cannabis business tax. Such tax
is payable regardless of whether the business has been issued a cannabis
business license or permit to operate lawfully in the city or is operating
unlawfully. The city’s acceptance of a cannabis business tax payment from a
cannabis business operating illegally will not constitute the city’s approval
or consent to such illegal operations.
   (B)   The initial rate of the cannabis business tax shall be as follows:
      (1)   (a)   For every person who is engaged in commercial cannabis
cultivation in the city:
            1.   Seven dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a
facility that uses exclusively artificial lighting;
            2.   Four dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a
facility that uses a combination of natural and supplemental artificial
lighting;
            3.   Two dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a
facility that uses no artificial lighting; and
            4.   One dollar annually per square foot of canopy space for any
nursery.
         (b)   For purposes of this division (B), the square feet of canopy
space for a business shall be rebuttably presumed to be the maximum square
footage of canopy allowed by the business’s city permit for commercial cannabis
cultivation, or, in the absence of a city permit, the square footage shall be
the maximum square footage of canopy for commercial cannabis cultivation
allowed by the state license type. Should a city permit be issued to a business
which cultivates only for certain months of the year, the city shall prorate
the tax as to sufficiently reflect the period in which cultivation is occurring
at the business. In no case shall canopy square footage which is authorized by
the city commercial cannabis permit but not utilized for cultivation be
deducted for the purpose of determining the tax for cultivation, unless the Tax
Administrator is informed in writing and authorizes such reduction for the
purpose of relief from the tax prior to the period for which the space will not
be used, that such space will not be used.
      (2)   For every person who engages in the operation of a testing
laboratory: 1% of gross receipts;
      (3)   For every person who engages in the retail sales of cannabis as a
retailer (dispensary) or non-store front retailer (delivery) or microbusiness
(retail sales): 4% of gross receipts;
      (4)   For every person who engages in a cannabis distribution business:
2% of gross receipts; and
      (5)   For every person who engages in a cannabis manufacturing,
processing or microbusiness (non-retail), or any other type of cannabis
business not described in divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) above:
2.5% of gross receipts. However, cultivation for a microbusiness shall be taxed
at the rate established in division (B)(1)(a)1. above.
   (C)   The City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, adjust the rate of
the cannabis business tax. However, in no event may the City Council set any
adjusted rate that exceeds the maximum rate calculated pursuant to division (D)
below for the date on which the adjusted rate will commence.
   (D)   The maximum rate shall be calculated as follows.
      (1)   For every person who is engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation
in the city:
         (a)   Through January 1, 2021, the maximum rate shall be:
            1.   Ten dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a
facility that uses exclusively artificial lighting;
            2.   Seven dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a
facility that uses a combination of natural and supplemental artificial
lighting;
            3.   Four dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a
facility that uses no artificial lighting; and
            4.   Two dollars annually per square foot of canopy space for any
nursery.
         (b)   On January 1, 2022 and on each January 1 thereafter, the maximum
annual tax rate per square foot of each type of canopy space shall increase by
the percentage change between January of the calendar year prior to such
increase and January of the calendar year of the increase in the Consumer Price
Index (“CPI”) for all urban consumers in the Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario
area, as published by the United States Government Bureau of Labor Statistics.
However, no CPI adjustment resulting in a decrease of any tax imposed by this
division (D)(1)(b) shall be made.
      (2)   For every person who engages in the operation of a testing
laboratory, the maximum tax rate shall not exceed 2.5% of gross receipts.
      (3)   For every person who engages in the retail sales of cannabis as a
retailer (dispensary) or non-store front retailer (delivery business) or
microbusiness (retail sales activity), the maximum tax rate shall not exceed 6%
of gross receipts.
      (4)   For every person who engages in a cannabis distribution business,
the maximum tax rate shall not exceed 3% of gross receipts.
      (5)   For every person who engages in a cannabis manufacturing,
processing or microbusiness (non-retail activity) or any other type of cannabis
business not described in divisions (D)(1), (D)(2), (D)(3) or (D)(4) above, the
maximum tax rate shall not exceed 4% of gross receipts. However, the maximum
tax rate for cultivation for a microbusiness shall be the rate established in
division (D)(1)(a)1. above, as may be increased, from time to time, by the
provisions of division (D)(1)(b) above.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.060 REPORTING AND REMITTANCE OF TAX.
   (A)   The cannabis business tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid, in
arrears, on a quarterly basis. For commercial cannabis cultivation, the tax due
for each calendar quarter shall be based on the square footage of the
business’s canopy space during the quarter and the rate shall be 25% of the
applicable annual rate. For all other cannabis businesses activities, the tax
due for each calendar quarter shall be based on the gross receipts for the
quarter.
   (B)   Each person owing cannabis business tax for a calendar quarter shall,
no later than the last day of the month following the close of the calendar
quarter, file with the Tax Administrator a statement of the tax owed for that
calendar quarter and the basis for calculating that tax. The Tax Administrator
may require that the statement be submitted on a form prescribed by the Tax
Administrator. The tax for each calendar quarter shall be due and payable on
that same date that the statement for the calendar quarter is due.
   (C)   Upon cessation of a cannabis business, tax statements and payments
shall be immediately due for all calendar quarters up to the calendar quarter
during which cessation occurred.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator may, at his or her discretion, establish shorter
report and payment periods for any taxpayer as the Tax Administrator deems
necessary to ensure collection of the tax. The Tax Administrator may also
require that a deposit, to be applied against the taxes for a calendar quarter,
be made by a taxpayer at the beginning of that calendar quarter. In no event
shall the deposit required by the Tax Administrator exceed the tax amount he or
she projects will be owed by the taxpayer for the calendar quarter. The Tax
Administrator may require that a taxpayer make payments via a cashier’s check,
money order, wire transfer or similar instrument.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the square feet of canopy space for a
business shall be rebuttably presumed to be no less than the maximum square
footage of canopy allowed by the business’s city permit for commercial cannabis
cultivation, or, in the absence of a city permit, the square footage shall be
the maximum square footage of canopy for commercial cannabis cultivation
allowed by the state license type. In no case shall canopy square footage which
is authorized by the permit or license but not utilized for cultivation be
excluded from taxation unless the Tax Administrator is informed in writing,
prior to the period for which the space will not be used, that such space will
not be used.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.070 PAYMENTS AND COMMUNICATIONS - TIMELY REMITTANCE.
   Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication is
due, it must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the final due
date. A postmark will not be accepted as timely remittance. If the due date
would fall on a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday observed by the city, the due
date shall be the next regular business day on which the city is open to the
public.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.080 PAYMENT - WHEN TAXES DEEMED DELINQUENT.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided under other provisions of this
chapter, the taxes required to be paid pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed
delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the due date
as specified in §§
5.18.060 and
5.18.070.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.090 NOTICE NOT REQUIRED BY THE CITY.
   The city may, as a courtesy, send a tax notice to the business. However, the
Tax Administrator is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill
to any person subject to the provisions of this chapter. Failure to send such
notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.100 PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   (A)   Any person who fails or refuses to pay any cannabis business tax
required to be paid pursuant to this chapter on or before the due date shall
pay penalties and interest as follows:
      (1)   A penalty equal to 10% of the amount of the tax, in addition to the
amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax calculated from the due date
of the tax at the rate of 1% per month;
      (2)   If the tax remains unpaid for a period exceeding one calendar month
beyond the due date, an additional penalty equal to 25% of the amount of the
tax, plus interest at the rate of 1% per month on the unpaid tax and on the
unpaid penalties; and
      (3)   Interest shall be applied at the rate of 1% per month on the first
day of the month for the full month and will continue to accrue monthly on the
tax and penalty until the balance is paid in full.
   (B)   Whenever a check or electronic payment is submitted in payment of a
cannabis business tax and the payment is subsequently returned unpaid by the
bank for any reason, the taxpayer will be liable for the tax amount due plus
any fees, penalties and interest as provided for in this section, and any other
amount allowed under state law.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.110 REFUNDS AND CREDITS.
   (A)   No refund shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter,
except as provided in §
5.18.120.
   (B)   No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter shall be made
because of the discontinuation, dissolution or other termination of a business.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.120 REFUNDS AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Whenever the amount of any cannabis business tax, penalty or interest
has been overpaid, paid more than once or has been erroneously collected or
received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded to the claimant who
paid the tax provided that a written claim for refund is filed with the Tax
Administrator within one year of the date the tax was originally due and
payable.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator, his or her designee or any other city officer
charged with the administration of this chapter shall have the right to examine
and audit all the books and business records of the claimant in order to
determine the eligibility of the claimant to the claimed refund. No claim for
refund shall be allowed if the claimant refuses to allow such examination of
claimant’s books and business records after request by the Tax Administrator to
do so.
   (C)   In the event that the cannabis business tax was erroneously paid, and
the errors attributable to the city, the city shall refund the amount of tax
erroneously paid up to one year from the date that the tax was paid.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.130 PERSONAL CULTIVATION NOT TAXED.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to personal cannabis
cultivation, as defined in the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and
Safety Act. This chapter shall not apply to personal use of cannabis that is
specifically exempted from city and state licensing requirements, that meets
the definition of personal use or equivalent terminology under state law and
for which the individual receives no compensation whatsoever related to that
personal use.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.140 ADMINISTRATION OF THE TAX.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Tax Administrator to collect the taxes,
penalties, fees and perform the duties required by this chapter.
   (B)   For purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter
generally, the Tax Administrator may, from time to time, promulgate such
administrative interpretations, rules and procedures consistent with the
purpose, intent and express terms of this chapter as he or she deems necessary
to implement or clarify such provisions or aid in enforcement.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator may take such administrative actions as needed
to administer the tax, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Provide to all cannabis business taxpayers forms for the reporting
of the tax;
      (2)   Provide information to any taxpayer concerning the provisions of
this chapter;
      (3)   Receive and record all taxes remitted to the city as provided in
this chapter;
      (4)   Maintain records of taxpayer reports and taxes collected pursuant
to this chapter;
      (5)   Assess penalties and interest to taxpayers pursuant to this
chapter; and
      (6)   Determine amounts owed and enforce collection pursuant to this
chapter.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.150 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Any taxpayer aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator with respect
to the amount of tax, interest, penalties and fees, if any, due under this
chapter may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the
City Clerk within 30 calendar days of the serving or mailing of the
determination of tax due. The City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall fix a
time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk, or his or her
designee, shall give notice in writing to such operator at the last known place
of address. The finding of the City Council shall be final and conclusive and
shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed by this chapter for
service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately
due and payable upon the service of the notice.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.160 ENFORCEMENT - ACTION TO COLLECT.
   Any taxes, penalties and/or fees required to be paid under the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the city. Any person owing money to
the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in an action
brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such debt. The provisions
of this section shall not be deemed a limitation upon the right of the city to
bring any other action including criminal, civil and equitable actions, based
upon the failure to pay the tax, penalties and/or fees imposed by this chapter
or the failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.170 APPORTIONMENT.
   If a business subject to the tax is operating both within and outside the
city, it is the intent of the city to apply the cannabis business tax so that
the measure of the tax fairly reflects the proportion of the taxed activity
actually carried on in the city. To the extent federal or state law requires
that any tax due from any taxpayer be apportioned, the taxpayer may indicate
said apportionment on his or her tax return. The Tax Administrator may
promulgate administrative procedures for apportionment as he or she finds
useful or necessary.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.180 CONSTITUTIONALITY AND LEGALITY.
   This tax is intended to be applied in a manner consistent with the U.S. and
California Constitutions and state law. None of the tax provided for by this
chapter shall be applied in a manner that causes an undue burden upon
interstate commerce, a violation of the equal protection or due process clauses
of the U.S. or California Constitutions or a violation of any other provision
of the California Constitution or state law. If a person believes that the tax,
as applied to him or her, is impermissible under applicable law, he or she may
request that the Tax Administrator release him or her from the obligation to
pay the impermissible portion of the tax.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.190 AUDIT AND EXAMINATION OF PREMISES AND RECORDS.
   (A)   For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of cannabis business tax
owed or verifying any representations made by any taxpayer to the city in
support of his or her tax calculation, the Tax Administrator shall have the
power to inspect any location where commercial cannabis cultivation occurs and
to audit and examine all books and records (including, but not limited to,
bookkeeping records, state and federal income tax returns and other records
relating to the gross receipts of the business) of persons engaged in cannabis
businesses. In conducting such investigation, the Tax Administrator shall have
the power to inspect any equipment, such as computers or point of sale
machines, that may contain such records.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and
payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve,
for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to
determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the
collection of and payment to the city, which records the Tax Administrator, or
his or her designee, shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.200 OTHER LICENSES, PERMITS, TAXES, FEES OR CHARGES.
   (A)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to repeal, amend, be
in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any requirements for any city permit,
permit or license required by, under or by virtue of any provision of any other
chapter of this code or any other ordinance or resolution of the city, nor be
deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any tax,
fee or other charge imposed, assessed or required by, under or by virtue of any
other chapter of this code or any other ordinance or resolution of the city.
Any references made or contained in any other chapter of this code to any
licenses, license taxes, fees or charges, or to any schedule of license fees,
shall be deemed to refer to the licenses, license taxes, fees or charges, or
schedule of license fees, provided for in the other chapter of this code.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, a cannabis business shall not be
required to pay the license fee required by
Chapter 5.04 so long as all of business’s activities within the city that would
require payment of a license fee are activities subject to the cannabis
business tax.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator may revoke or refuse to renew the license
required by
Chapter 5.04 for any business that is delinquent in the payment of any tax due
pursuant to this chapter or that fails to make a deposit required by the Tax
Administrator pursuant to §
5.18.060.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.210 PAYMENT OF TAX DOES NOT AUTHORIZE UNLAWFUL BUSINESS.
   (A)   The payment of a cannabis business tax required by this chapter, and
its acceptance by the city, shall not entitle any person to carry on any
cannabis business unless the person has complied with all of the requirements
of this code and all other applicable state laws.
   (B)   No tax paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as
authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business or
any business in violation of any local or state law.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.220 DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS.
   If the Tax Administrator is not satisfied that any statement filed as
required under the provisions of this chapter is correct, or that the amount of
tax is correctly computed, he or she may compute and determine the amount to be
paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained
in the statement or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession
or that may come into his or her possession within three years of the date the
tax was originally due and payable. One or more deficiency determinations of
the amount of tax due for a period or periods may be made. When a person
discontinues engaging in a business, a deficiency determination may be made at
any time within three years thereafter as to any liability arising from
engaging in such business whether or not a deficiency determination is issued
prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due. Whenever a deficiency
determination is made, a notice shall be given to the person concerned in the
same manner as notices of assessment are given under §
5.18.240.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.230 FAILURE TO REPORT - NON-PAYMENT, FRAUD.
   (A)   Under any of the following circumstances, the Tax Administrator may
make and give notice of an assessment of the amount of tax owed by a person
under this chapter at any time:
      (1)   If the person has not filed a complete statement required under the
provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   If the person has not paid the tax due under the provisions of this
chapter;
      (3)   If the person has not, after demand by the Tax Administrator, filed
a corrected statement, or furnished to the Tax Administrator adequate
substantiation of the information contained in a statement already filed, or
paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter; or
      (4)   If the Tax Administrator determines that the non-payment of any
business tax due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25% of the
amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to penalties and interest
otherwise stated in this chapter and any other penalties allowed by law.
   (B)   The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any
tax known by the Tax Administrator to be due or estimated by the Tax
Administrator, after consideration of all information within the Tax
Administrator’s knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person
assessed, to be due under each applicable section of this chapter, and shall
include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the
date of the notice of assessment.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.240 TAX ASSESSMENT - NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by personal
delivery, by overnight delivery by a nationally-recognized courier service or
by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon,
addressed to the person at the address of the location of the business or to
such other address as he or she shall register with the Tax Administrator for
the purpose of receiving notices provided under this chapter; or, should the
person have no address registered with the Tax Administrator for such purpose,
then to such person’s last known address. For the purposes of this section, a
service by overnight delivery shall be deemed to have occurred one calendar day
following deposit with a courier and service by mail shall be deemed to have
occurred three days following deposit in the United States mail.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.250 TAX ASSESSMENT - HEARING, APPLICATION AND DETERMINATION.
   Within 30 calendar days after the date of service, the person may apply in
writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the assessment. If
application for a hearing before the city is not made within the time herein
prescribed, the tax assessed by the Tax Administrator shall become final and
conclusive. Within 30 calendar days of the receipt of any such application for
hearing, the Tax Administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing
before him or her no later than 30 calendar days after the receipt of the
application, unless a later date is agreed to by the Tax Administrator and the
person requesting the hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given by the Tax
Administrator to the person requesting such hearing not later than five
calendar days prior to such hearing. At such hearing, said applicant may appear
and offer evidence why the assessment as made by the Tax Administrator should
not be confirmed and fixed as the tax due. After such hearing, the Tax
Administrator shall determine and reassess the proper tax to be charged and
shall give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in §
5.18.240 for giving notice of assessment.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.260 RELIEF FROM TAXES - DISASTER RELIEF.
   (A)   If a business is unable to comply with any tax requirement due to a
disaster, the business may notify the Tax Administrator of this inability to
comply and request relief from the tax requirement. A request for relief must
clearly indicate why relief is requested, the time period for which the relief
is requested and the reason relief is needed for the specific amount of time.
   (B)   To obtain relief, the cannabis business must agree to grant the Tax
Administrator, or his or her designee, access to the location where the
cannabis business has been impacted due to a disaster.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator, in his or her sole discretion, may provide
relief from the cannabis business tax requirement for businesses whose
operations have been impacted by a disaster of such tax liability does not
exceed $5,000. If such tax liability is $5,001 or more, then such relief shall
only be approved by the City Council.
   (D)   Temporary relief from the cannabis tax may be granted for a reasonable
amount of time as determined by the Tax Administrator or the City Council, as
applicable in order to allow the cannabis business time to recover from the
disaster.
   (E)   The Tax Administrator or City Council, as applicable, may require that
certain conditions be followed in order for a cannabis business to receive
temporary relief from the cannabis business tax requirement.
   (F)   For purposes of this section, DISASTER means fire, flood, storm, tidal
wave, earthquake or similar public calamity, whether or not resulting from
natural causes.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.270 CONVICTION FOR VIOLATION - TAXES NOT WAIVED.
   The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required
tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax
debt unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil action shall prevent a
criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of
any state law requiring the payment of all taxes.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.280 VIOLATION DEEMED MISDEMEANOR.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.290 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or
circumstance, is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unlawful, unenforceable or otherwise void, that determination shall have no
effect on any other provision of this chapter or the application of this
chapter to any other person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions
hereof are severable.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.300 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available
under any other provision of the municipal code and any other provision of law
or equity are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the city shall not
bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
§ 5.18.310 AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   This chapter may be repealed or amended by the City Council without a
vote of the people to the extent allowed by law. However, as required by
Article XIII C of the California Constitution, voter approval is required for
any amendment that would increase the rate of any tax levied pursuant to this
chapter.
   (B)   The people of the city affirm that the following actions shall not
constitute an increase of the rate of a tax:
      (1)   The restoration or adjustment of the rate of the tax to a rate that
is no higher than that set by this chapter, if the City Council has acted to
reduce the rate of the tax or incrementally implement an increase authorized by
this chapter;
      (2)   An action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax,
or any definition applicable to the tax, so long as interpretation or
clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification)
is not inconsistent with the language of this chapter; or
      (3)   The collection of the tax imposed by this chapter even if the city
had, for some period of time, failed to collect the tax.
(Ord. MC-1501, passed 11-6-2018)
CHAPTER 5.19: PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
Section
   
5.19.010   Definitions
   
5.19.020   Permit required
   
5.19.030   Application for permit and permit fee
   
5.19.040   Police Department investigation
   
5.19.050   Permit procedures
   
5.19.060   Display of permit
   
5.19.070   Tax exempt organizations exemption to payment of permit fee
   
5.19.080   Exemption of children selling for school, charity or other
fundraising events
   
5.19.090   Violation - penalty
   
5.19.100   Supplemental procedure
   
5.19.110   Severability
§ 5.19.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLING. The act by any person of going from house to house, place to place
or in or along the streets within the city, either on foot, by wagon, cart,
automobile, motor truck, ice cream cart, ice cream wagon, ice cream truck or
any conveyance, selling and making immediate delivery of, or offering for sale
and immediate delivery of, any goods, wares, merchandise or anything of value,
in possession of the person.
   SOLICITING. The act by any person of going from house to house, place to
place or in or along the streets within the city, selling or taking orders for,
or offering to sell or take orders for, goods, wares, merchandise or other
things of value for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the
future, or asking for charitable donations.
§ 5.19.020 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
peddling goods, wares, merchandise, fruits and vegetables or prepared/
prepackaged foods, including, but not limited to: ice cream; or of soliciting
orders for goods or services; or of soliciting donations for charity in an open
public place or door to door within the city without first having secured a
peddling or soliciting permit. A separate permit shall be required for each
person who will be peddling or soliciting.
   (B)   Permits shall be issued for a one-year period. Upon expiration of the
permit, the former permitee may apply for a new permit in the same manner as a
new applicant, except that if the permitee applies for a new permit before the
old permit expires, the old permit shall remain in force until the City Clerk,
or his or her designee, either approves or denies the application for the new
permit.
§ 5.19.030 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT AND PERMIT FEE.
   (A)   Permit application. The applicant for any peddling or soliciting
permit shall provide to the City Clerk, or his or her designee, on a form
prepared by the Clerk the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   The place and date of any conviction within the past ten years for
a crime of moral turpitude, criminal battery, fraud, burglary or theft of the
applicant;
      (3)   Such fingerprints and/or other documents which reasonably relate to
permitting under this title, as may be required by the Police Department, of
the applicant;
      (4)   A copy of the state sales tax permit (Cal. Revenue and Taxation
Code, § 6066) for the applicant’s activities attached to the application;
      (5)   A general description of the type of merchandise or service that
the applicant proposes to peddle or solicit;
      (6)   A statement that the applicant is not required to register under
Cal. Penal Code, §§ 290 et seq.; and
      (7)   If the applicant is a corporation, a list of all officers,
directors and majority stockholders.
   (B)   Permit application fee. Each application shall be accompanied by a
non-refundable investigative fee established by resolution of the Mayor and
City Council.
§ 5.19.040 POLICE DEPARTMENT INVESTIGATION.
   Upon the filing of the application required by §
5.19.030, together with the application fee(s), the City Clerk, or his or her
designee, shall transmit one copy to the Police Department. The applicant shall
cooperate with the Police Department in conducting its investigation and shall,
if requested, provide the Police Department other documents or materials which
may be requested which reasonably relate to the course of the Department’s
investigation. Within 45 calendar days of the date the application is filed
with the City Clerk, the Chief of Police shall report to the City Clerk in
writing recommending approval or denial of the permit and stating the reasons
therefor.
§ 5.19.050 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall not issue a peddler’s or
solicitor’s permit unless all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The applicant has submitted a correct and complete application form
both as to the applicant and, if applicant is a corporation, a list of the
corporation’s officers, directors and majority stockholders;
      (2)   The applicant has provided fingerprints, if requested by the Police
Department, of the applicant;
      (3)   The applicant has paid the application fee;
      (4)   Neither the applicant nor, if the applicant is a corporation, the
corporation’s officers, directors and majority stockholders has within the past
ten years been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude, criminal battery,
fraud, burglary or theft;
      (5)   Neither the applicant nor, if the applicant is a corporation, the
corporation’s officers, directors and majority stockholders has ever been
convicted of a crime that requires registration under Cal. Penal Code, § 290;
and
      (6)   If required, the applicant has obtained a food permit from the
County Environmental Health Department.
   (B)   Any person denied a permit pursuant to this chapter shall not peddle
or solicit within the city. Upon determination of grounds to deny a permit, the
City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall cause a “notice of denial” to be
mailed by first class, postage prepaid mail, to the notice address designated
by the applicant.
   (C)   Any person denied a permit pursuant to these provisions may appeal
pursuant to §§
5.82.100 through
5.82.150.
   (D)   All permits issued hereunder are non-transferable.
§ 5.19.060 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   Every person to whom a permit has been granted shall display the permit in a
conspicuous place at all times while peddling or soliciting. Failure to display
the permit is a violation of this chapter.
§ 5.19.070 TAX EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS EXEMPTION TO PAYMENT OF PERMIT FEE.
   Whenever any person intends to peddle or solicit goods, wares, services or
merchandise for the purpose of raising funds or soliciting donations for a tax
exempt organization, said applicant may apply to the City Clerk for a permit to
be issued without payment of the permit fee. If satisfied that the funds will
be used for the purposes mentioned herein, the City Clerk shall order the
issuance of a permit for said peddling or solicitation for a term fixed by the
City Clerk.
§ 5.19.080 EXEMPTION OF CHILDREN SELLING FOR SCHOOL, CHARITY OR OTHER
FUNDRAISING EVENTS.
   This chapter shall not apply to children selling items for school, charity
or other fundraising events.
§ 5.19.090 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor which, upon
conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
§ 5.19.100 SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEDURE.
   The prohibitions set forth in this chapter are supplemental to any similar
prohibitions set forth in state law.
§ 5.19.110 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or words of this chapter
be rendered or declared invalid by any final court action in a court of
competent jurisdiction, or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the
remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences and words of this chapter
shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. MC-1282, passed 8-19-2008)
CHAPTER 5.20: MASSAGE PARLORS - MASSAGISTS
Section
   
5.20.010   Definitions
   
5.20.020   Permit - required - massage technician license
   
5.20.030   Permit - exceptions
   
5.20.040   Permit - application - fee
   
5.20.050   Permit - application - contents
   
5.20.060   Necessary facilities
   
5.20.070   License procedures
   
5.20.080   Display of permit
   
5.20.090   Change of location
   
5.20.100   Employees
   
5.20.110   Inspection
   
5.20.120   Revocation of permit
   
5.20.130   Grounds for revocation
   
5.20.140   Records of treatment
   
5.20.150   Those practicing before chapter becomes effective
   
5.20.160   Expiration and renewal of permit
Cross-reference:
   For license fees for massage parlors, see §
5.04.335
§ 5.20.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MASSAGE. The manipulation of body tissues for remedial, hygienic or other
purposes by rubbing, touching, stroking, tapping, kneading or vibrating with
the hands or by an instrument.
   MASSAGE PARLOR. Any massage establishment, or place of business wherein
massage as to all, or any one or more of the subjects and methods listed in the
definition of MASSAGE TECHNICIAN are administered or used.
   MASSAGE TECHNICIAN. Any person who practices or administers as to all or any
of the following named subjects, and who has made a study of the underlying
principles of anatomy and physiology as generally included in a regular course
of study by a recognized and approved school of massage: the art of body
massage, either by hands or with a mechanical or vibratory apparatus for the
purpose of body massaging, reducing or contouring; the use of oil rubs, heat
lamps, salt glows, hot and cold packs, tub, shower or cabinet baths; variations
of the following procedures are employed: touch, stroking, friction, kneading,
vibration, percussion and medical gymnastics. MASSAGE TECHNICIANS shall not
diagnose or treat classified diseases, nor practice spinal or other joint
manipulations, nor prescribe medicines or drugs.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975)
§ 5.20.020 PERMIT - REQUIRED - MASSAGE TECHNICIAN LICENSE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to
engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or
carried on, in or upon any premises within the city, the business of a massage
parlor or to render or permit to be rendered massage services at a location
removed from a massage establishment within the city in the absence of a permit
issued pursuant to the provisions hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person or persons to engage in the practice or
attempt to practice massage, whether for a fee or gratuitously, or to conduct
massage without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to
operate or conduct any massage parlor which does not conform to the sanitary
provisions contained in this chapter, or to employ any person as a massage
operator who does not hold a permit.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975)
§ 5.20.030 PERMIT - EXCEPTIONS.
   The requirements of this chapter shall have no application and no effect
upon and shall not be construed as applying to any physician, surgeon,
chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist duly licensed by the state, or to
any nurse, assistant, trainee or other person administering under the immediate
Cal. Business and Professions Code or any other law of this state.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975)
 
§ 5.20.040 PERMIT - APPLICATION - FEE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate a massage parlor or
to perform massage services shall make written application to the City Clerk,
who shall refer all such applications to the Chief of Police for appropriate
investigations.
   (B)   (1)   Massage parlor. Each application shall be accompanied by a non-
refundable investigative fee established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council for each owner, plus an additional non-refundable fee established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council for each massage technician.
      (2)   Beauty salon - accessory service. For established beauty salons
holding a current business registration certificate and providing massage
services as an incidental or accessory service, each application for a massage
technician providing massage services shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
investigative fee established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (C)   (1)   Massage parlor. Each application shall be accompanied by a non-
refundable examination fee established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council for each owner, plus an additional non-refundable examination fee
established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council for each massage
technician.
      (2)   Beauty salon - accessory service. For established beauty salons
holding a current business registration certificate and providing massage
services as an incidental or accessory service, each application for a massage
technician providing massage services shall be accompanied by a non-refundable,
examination fee established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (D)   A permit to perform massage services as a massage technician does not
authorize the operation of a massage parlor
   (E)   Any person licensed to perform massage services who desires to operate
a massage parlor shall separately apply for a permit therefor.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975; Ord. MC-744, passed
10-8-1990; Ord. MC-1273, passed 6-17-2008)
§ 5.20.050 PERMIT - APPLICATION - CONTENTS.
   An applicant for a permit shall submit the following information:
   (A)   Full name and any alias heretofore used or currently used and current
address;
   (B)   Fingerprints as may be required by the City Police Department;
   (C)   The two previous business and residence addresses of the applicant
immediately prior to the current address;
   (D)   Written statements of at least three bona fide residents of the county
that the applicant is a person of good moral character;
   (E)   Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years;
   (F)   Applicant’s height, weight and color of eyes and hair;
   (G)   Two current photographs at least two inches by two inches in size;
   (H)   The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three
years immediately preceding the date of the application;
   (I)   Any massage or similar business license history of the applicant,
including whether such person, in previous operation, in this or another area,
has had his or her license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and any
business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or
revocation;
   (J)   All convictions and the grounds therefor;
   (K)   A certificate from a medical doctor designating that the applicant
has, within 30 days immediately prior thereto, been examined and found to be
free of any contagious or communicable disease; and
   (L)   Applicant must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a
recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method,
profession or work of massage technician or therapist is taught. RECOGNIZED
SCHOOL means and includes any school or institution of learning approved by the
State Board of Education, which has, for its purpose, the teaching of the
theory, method, profession or work of massage technician, which school requires
a resident course of study of not less than 600 hours to be given in not less
than six calendar months before the student shall be furnished with a diploma
or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning
showing the successful completion of such study or learning. Schools offering
correspondence courses and not requiring actual class  attendance shall not be
deemed RECOGNIZED SCHOOLS. The City Clerk shall confirm that an applicant has
actually attended classes and matriculated in a recognized school by requiring
the applicant to submit to a written examination in massage subjects and
techniques.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975)
§ 5.20.060 NECESSARY FACILITIES.
   No permit to conduct a massage parlor shall be issued unless an inspection
discloses that the massage parlor complies with each of the following minimum
requirements.
   (A)   A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the
establishment as a massage parlor; provided also that all such signs shall
otherwise comply with the general sign requirements of
Chapter 16.04.
   (B)   Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the
International Building Code, and, additionally, at least one artificial light
of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth
where massage services are being rendered.
   (C)   Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the
International Building Code.
   (D)   Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing any instruments
used for massage shall be provided.
   (E)   Hot and cold running water shall be provided.
   (F)   Closed cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen.
   (G)   Adequate dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons.
   (H)   All walls, ceilings, floors, steam or vapor rooms, and all other
physical facilities for the massage parlor shall be kept in good repair and
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (I)   Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for patrons
receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens shall be
permitted.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975)
§ 5.20.070 LICENSE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Upon payment of all fees, submitting of all information required by
application and upon proper inspection, a permit shall be granted, if all
requirements of all departments concerned as well as those described herein are
met, and unless it appears that any such applicant has deliberately falsified
the application, or the record of such applicant reveals a conviction of a
felony or a crime of moral turpitude.
   (B)   Any person denied a permit pursuant to these provisions may appeal to
the City Council in writing, stating reasons why the permit should be granted.
The City Council may grant or deny the permit. The Council may also review any
determination of the City Clerk granting or denying a permit on its own motion.
   (C)   All permits issued hereunder are non-transferable; provided, however,
that a change of location of a massage parlor may be permitted pursuant to the
provisions hereof.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975)
§ 5.20.080 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   Every person to whom a permit has been granted shall display the permit in a
conspicuous place.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975)
§ 5.20.090 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   A change of location of the massage premises shall be approved by the Chief
of Police; provided all general ordinances are complied with and the change of
location fee of $10 is first paid.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975)
§ 5.20.100 EMPLOYEES.
   It is unlawful for the holder of a permit for a massage parlor to employ,
use or permit any person to practice as a massage technician unless such
massage technician has first obtained a valid permit pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-
13-1985)
§ 5.20.110 INSPECTION.
   At least twice each year, an inspection of each massage parlor may be made
for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter are met.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975)
§ 5.20.120 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   No permit shall be revoked until due notice and a hearing shall have
been held before the Mayor and City Council to determine just cause for
revocation. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at
least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state
the grounds of the complaint against the holder of such permit, and shall
designate the time and place where such hearing will be had.
   (B)   The notice shall be served upon the permit holder by delivering the
same personally or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence
of the permit holder in the custody of a person over the age of 18 years. In
the event the permit holder cannot be found, and the service of such notice
cannot be otherwise made in the manner herein provided, a copy of such notice
shall be mailed, certified postage fully prepaid, addressed to the permit
holder at his or her place of business or residence at least ten days prior to
the date of such hearing.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975)
§ 5.20.130 GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION.
   The permit of a massage technician may be revoked upon one or more of the
following grounds:
   (A)   That the holder is guilty of fraud or deceit in his or her being
licensed to the practice of massage;
   (B)   That the holder is practicing massage in a manner intended to arouse,
appeal to or gratify the lust or passions or sexual desires of another;
   (C)   That the holder has been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude; the conviction of a
felony shall be the conviction of an offense which, if committed within this
state, would constitute a felony under the laws thereof;
   (D)   That the holder is impersonating another practitioner of a like or
different name; and
   (E)   That the holder has employed, allowed or permitted an unlicensed
person to perform massage in his or her massage parlor.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975)
§ 5.20.140 RECORDS OF TREATMENT.
   Every person, association, firm or corporation operating a massage parlor
under a permit as provided in this chapter shall keep a record of the date and
hour of each treatment, the name and address of the patron and the name of the
technician administering such treatment. Identical records shall be kept of
treatments rendered off the business site, and, in addition, shall describe the
address where the treatment was rendered. The records shall be maintained for a
period of two years. The records shall be open to inspection by officials
charged with the enforcement of these provisions for the purposes of law
enforcement and for other purposes related to this chapter.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975)
§ 5.20.150 THOSE PRACTICING BEFORE CHAPTER BECOMES EFFECTIVE.
   Any person who is actively engaged in the practice of massage in the city on
the effective date of this chapter and who has practiced such profession
continuously for three years or more, or has served as an apprentice
continuously for three years or more at any place within the state, or has a
diploma from a recognized school of massage, as defined in §
5.20.010, on the effective date of this chapter, or who is eligible for
membership in the American Massage and Therapy Association (also called
“A.M.T.A.”) based upon his or her experience and qualifications shall be
granted a permit as a massage technician without first complying with other
requirements of this chapter, except for physical conditions and adequacy of
facilities, upon payment of the prescribed fee. Such person shall have one year
from the effective date of this chapter to so qualify.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975)
§ 5.20.160 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF PERMIT.
   All permits issued under the provisions hereof shall expire on January 1,
1982, and thereafter, on July 1 of each year commencing with 1983. For the
period from January 1, 1982 to June 30, 1983, a renewal permit may be issued
upon application to the City Clerk and payment of a renewal fee of $15. Any
application for renewal must be made on or before January 15, 1982. For any
renewal permits sought after June 30, 1983, a renewal permit may be issued upon
application to the City Clerk and the payment of a renewal fee established by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council. Any application for renewal must be
made on or before July 15 of each year, commencing in 1983. In the event or
failure to so apply for the renewal on or before the date specified, a person
whose permit has expired shall be deemed a new applicant and shall qualify by
taking the examination therefor.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3495, passed 4-24-1975; Ord. MC-118, passed
11-16-1981; Ord. MC-744, passed 10-8-1990)
CHAPTER 5.22: OUTDOOR SALES AND DISPLAYS
Section
   
5.22.010   Permit required
   
5.22.020   Permit - fee
   
5.22.030   Permit - issuance
   
5.22.040   Limited outdoor displays permitted
   
5.22.050   Exemptions
§ 5.22.010 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct outdoor sales
or displays, except upon issuance of a permit by the City Clerk.
(Ord. MC-535, passed 8-6-1986)
§ 5.22.020 PERMIT - FEE.
   The permit fee shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council.
(Ord. MC-535, passed 8-6-1986)
§ 5.22.030 PERMIT - ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Said permits shall be issued only to persons holding an active
business license at the time of the application for such permit, and such
permit shall be kept on the premises while in force.
   (B)   A permit shall not be issued for the same location more than four
times in any calendar year and not more than once within any 30-day period. The
permit shall be valid for nine calendar days, including holidays. The beginning
and ending date of the sale shall be stated in the permit.
(Ord. MC-535, passed 8-6-1986)
§ 5.22.040 LIMITED OUTDOOR DISPLAYS PERMITTED.
   Limited outdoor sales and displays of merchandise may be permitted upon
issuance of a permit pursuant to §
5.22.010, as long as the following criteria are met.
   (A)   No merchandise shall be located in public rights-of-way.
   (B)   Merchandise may be located in the parking lot, utilizing not more than
10% of the available parking spaces.
   (C)   No merchandise shall be located in areas required to meet the
landscaping standards set forth in Chapter 19.28 of the Development Code.
   (D)   No merchandise shall be located in such a way that it creates a public
safety hazard.
   (E)   The location of merchandise for sale or display shall be restricted to
those sides of the building where customer entrances are located.
(Ord. MC-535, passed 8-6-1986; Ord. MC-970, passed 6-4-1996)
§ 5.22.050 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following uses are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Permanent outdoor sales and display areas, for major tenants (15,000
square feet or greater), pursuant to Chapter 19.06 of the Development Code;
   (B)   Limited outside uses, such as patio dining areas and nursery sales,
pursuant to Chapter 19.06 of the Development Code;
   (C)   Display areas for the sale or rent of motor vehicles, pursuant to
Chapter 19.06 of the Development Code;
   (D)   City-sponsored uses and activities, or activities occurring on city
owned property, occurring at regular periodic intervals (weekly, monthly,
yearly and the like). Other city permits (building permits, encroachment
permits, tent permits and the like) may be required; and
   (E)   Personal property sales, pursuant to
Chapter 5.68.
(Ord. MC-970, passed 6-4-1996)
CHAPTER 5.24: TRANSPORTING PERSONS FOR HIRE
Section
   
5.24.010   Definitions
   
5.24.020   Tax-imposed
   
5.24.030   Reserved
   
5.24.040   Reserved
   
5.24.050   Reserved
   
5.24.060   Reserved
   
5.24.070   Reserved
   
5.24.080   Reserved
   
5.24.090   Reserved
   
5.24.100   Reserved
   
5.24.110   Reserved
   
5.24.120   Reserved
   
5.24.130   Reserved
   
5.24.140   Reserved
   
5.24.150   Exemption for vehicles operated exclusively in interstate commerce
   
5.24.160   Exemption for certain school buses
   
5.24.170   Exemptions and exceptions
Statutory reference:
   For provisions authorizing local authorities to license and regulate
vehicles for hire, see Cal. Vehicle Code, §§ 16501, 21100 and 21112
   For provisions on the financial responsibility of commercial passenger
vehicles, see Cal. Vehicle Code, §§ 16500 et seq.
§ 5.24.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Used in this chapter as defined in the Motor Vehicle
Transportation License Tax Act of California.
   OPERATOR. Defined in the Motor Vehicle Transportation License Tax Act of
California, with reference only, however, to persons engaging in the
transportation of persons for hire.
   TRANSPORTATION FOR HIRE. Deemed to include transportation for gain or
profit, direct or indirect.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3627, passed 2-24-1977)
Statutory reference:
   Motor Vehicle Transportation License Tax Act of California, see Cal. Revenue
and Taxation Code, §§ 10701 through 11053
§ 5.24.020 TAX-IMPOSED.
   (A)   Every person whose business in whole or in part is that of operator,
as defined in §
5.24.010, of any motor vehicle for the transportation of persons for hire and
who, in the course of that business, uses the public streets and highways of
this city for the purpose of such business, shall pay a business tax
established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   The business taxed under the provisions of this chapter shall be the
transportation of persons by an operator:
      (1)   Wholly within the city;
      (2)   From a place or places outside the city to a place or places within
the city;
      (3)   From a place or places within the city to a place or places outside
of the city; and
      (4)   From a place or places within the city to a place or places also
within the city even though such transportation involves going outside the city
in the course thereof.
   (C)   This chapter shall not apply to the business of operating motor
coaches or other motor vehicles under the provisions of a franchise granted
pursuant to provisions of the City Charter and Ord. 1666 (
Chapter 5.60) or 1987 (
Chapter 5.76); nor shall this section apply to an operator who transports
persons for hire from a place or places outside the city to a place or places
within the city by taxicabs when said operator does not also transport persons
for hire from a place within the city.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3627, passed 2-24-1977; Ord. MC-743, passed
10-8-1990)
§ 5.24.030 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.24.040 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.24.050 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.24.060 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.24.070 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.24.080 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.24.090 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.24.100 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.24.110 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.24.120 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.24.130 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.24.140 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-743, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 5.24.150 EXEMPTION FOR VEHICLES OPERATED EXCLUSIVELY IN INTERSTATE COMMERCE.
   No tax hereunder shall be required for the operation of any motor vehicle
for any day or fraction thereof when such vehicle is operated exclusively
between points within this city and points without this state.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3627, passed 2-24-1977)
§ 5.24.160 EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN SCHOOL BUSES.
   No tax hereunder shall be required for the operation of any motor vehicle
for any day or fraction thereof when such vehicle is operated exclusively on
any day to transport students or members of bona fide youth organizations and
their supervising adults to and from public or private schools, school events
or other youth activities, without regard to the manner or source of
compensation to the operator.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3627, passed 2-24-1977)
§ 5.24.170 EXEMPTIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   No tax hereunder shall be required for the operation of any motor vehicle
for any day or fraction thereof when such vehicle is operated exclusively
between fixed termini or over regular routes in passenger stage operations
under certificate issued by the Public Utilities Commission pursuant to the
Cal. Public Utilities Code, Division 1, Part 1, Chapter 5, Article 2 and for
which operation a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been
issued by the Interstate Commerce Commission.
(Ord. 763, passed 3-2-1920; Ord. 3627, passed 2-24-1977)
CHAPTER 5.26: SHOPPING CARTS
Section
   
5.26.010   Purpose
   
5.26.020   Definitions
   
5.26.030   Removal of shopping carts from public property
   
5.26.040   Disposal
   
5.26.050   Tag tampering prohibited
   
5.26.060   Unauthorized removal or possession of shopping carts
   
5.26.070   Impound appeal
§ 5.26.010 PURPOSE.
   Abandoned shopping carts located outside the premises or parking areas of
retail establishments and on public or private properties and viewable from the
public rights-of-way are injurious to the public health, safety and welfare and
constitute a public nuisance. This nuisance is caused by persons unlawfully
removing shopping carts from the premises or parking areas of retail
establishments, by certain retail establishments failing to maintain adequate
supervision of their premises and parking areas and failing to implement
effective cart removal prevention programs or cart retrieval programs. The
purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable regulations for the
collection and impound of abandoned shopping carts and to supplement provisions
of state law regarding the unauthorized removal of shopping carts from the
premises and parking areas of retail establishments.
§ 5.26.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED CONTRACTOR. A private company providing shopping cart retrieval
services, as designated by the City Council.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino or its designated representatives.
   OWNER-IDENTIFIED SHOPPING CART. A shopping cart that has a permanently
affixed sign that identifies, in accordance with the Cal. Business and
Professions Code, § 22435.1, the owner of the cart or the retailer, or both;
notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of
the cart from the owner’s premises; notifies the public that the unauthorized
removal of the cart from the cart owner’s premises or parking area or the
unauthorized possession of the cart is a violation of the state law; and lists
a valid telephone number or address for returning the cart to the owner or
retailer.
   PERSON. An individual or entity.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. All real property in the city in which a public agency has
a fee simple, easement, lease-hold interest or any possessory interest. This
includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks and flood control
facilities.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment utilizing shopping carts outside of
the establishment.
   SHOPPING CART or CART. A basket that is mounted on wheels or a similar
device generally used in retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of
transporting goods of any kind.
   UNIDENTIFIED SHOPPING CART. A shopping cart that is not an owner-identified
shopping cart.
§ 5.26.030 REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Upon the discovery of an unidentified shopping cart on public
property, the city or its authorized contractor may remove the cart. Such carts
shall be tagged with date and location and shall be impounded for 30 calendar
days at a location selected by the city. A claim for a cart shall be presented
to the City Administrator, or his or her duly authorized representative, and
shall be accompanied by proof of ownership of the cart. A person demonstrating
proof of ownership of a cart stored by the city shall pay the city’s tagging
and retrieval fee, as set by City Council resolution, prior to the cart being
released.
   (B)   Upon the discovery of any owner-identified shopping cart on public
property, the city or its authorized contractor may remove the cart and
promptly return it to the owner or premises identified thereon, or impound the
same for safekeeping and provide actual notice within 24 hours following such
storage to the owner, or his or her agent, where it may be retrieved at no
charge or cost if so retrieved within three business days following the date of
actual notice as provided herein. Each such cart shall be tagged with the date
and location of impoundment. Pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code, §
22435.7(i), said actual notice given to the owner of any owner-identified
shopping cart which is impounded pursuant to this section shall further specify
the date and time of such impoundment, the cost of retrieval if not so
retrieved within three business days following date of actual notice and that
failure to retrieve such cart within 30 calendar days of receipt of such notice
may result in the cart being disposed of as permitted by law.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to a cart attended by any person who can
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city or its authorized contractor,
ownership of the shopping cart, or written permission of the owner, to have the
cart in his or her possession.
§ 5.26.040 DISPOSAL.
   After the expiration of the 30-day period specified in §
5.26.030(A), the city, or its authorized contractor with the city’s approval,
may sell an unclaimed unidentified shopping cart at public auction or otherwise
dispose of the cart. After the expiration of the 30-day period specified in §
5.26.030(B), the city may sell or otherwise dispose of any unclaimed owner-
identified shopping cart as authorized by Cal. Business and Professions Code, §
22435.7(g).
§ 5.26.050 TAG TAMPERING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to remove any tag affixed by
the city, or its authorized contractor, to any shopping cart with the intent of
interfering with the enforcement of this chapter or evading any of its
provisions.
   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to obstruct, impede or
interfere with any representative of the city, or its authorized contractor,
who is engaged in tagging, removing or transporting a shopping cart in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 5.26.060 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OR POSSESSION OF SHOPPING CARTS.
   (A)   It shall be a misdemeanor to do any of the following acts with respect
to an owner-identified shopping cart:
      (1)   Remove a shopping cart from the premises or parking area of a
retail establishment with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the
owner or retailer of possession of the cart;
      (2)   Be in possession of any shopping cart that has been removed from
the premises or the parking area of a retail establishment, with the intent to
temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the
cart;
      (3)   Be in possession of any shopping cart with serial numbers removed,
obliterated or altered, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive
the owner or retailer of possession of the cart;
      (4)   Leave or abandon a shopping cart at a location other than the
premises or parking area of the retail establishment with the intent to
temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the
cart;
      (5)   Alter, convert or tamper with a shopping cart, or remove any part
or portion thereof, or to remove, obliterate or alter serial numbers on a cart,
with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of
possession of the cart; and
      (6)   Be in possession of any shopping cart while that cart is not
located on the premises or parking lot of a retail establishment, with the
intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of
possession of the cart.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person who can satisfactorily
demonstrate ownership of the shopping cart, or to any person having written
permission of the owner to have the cart in his or her possession.
   (C)   Any such shopping cart in the possession of any person found to be in
violation of Cal. Business and Professions Code, § 22435.2 may be returned to
the owner or premises identified thereon by the city or its authorized
contractor, or may be impounded for safekeeping provided actual notice within
24 hours following such storage is given to the owner, or his or her agent,
where said cart may be retrieved at no charge or cost if so retrieved within
three business days following the date of actual notice as provided herein.
Each such cart shall be tagged with the date and location of impoundment.
Pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code, § 22435.7(i), said actual
notice given to the owner of any such shopping cart which is impounded pursuant
to this section shall further specify the date and time of such impoundment,
the cost of retrieval if not so retrieved within three business days following
date of actual notice and that failure to retrieve such cart within 30 calendar
days of receipt of such notice may result in the cart being disposed of as
permitted by law.
§ 5.26.070 IMPOUND APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person who can demonstrate that he or she is a cart owner may
appeal the imposition of a tagging and retrieval fee by presenting evidence
that the cart removal and storage was not performed substantially in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. Appeals shall be made in writing to the
Mayor, or the Mayor’s duly authorized representative, within ten calendar days
of notification of such assessed fee. An office hearing will be held within 30
calendar days of the receipt of such appeal request. The shopping cart owner or
authorized representative may appear and be heard on the matter. If the Mayor,
or the Mayor’s duly authorized representative, determines that the shopping
cart was not removed and stored in substantial accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, the tagging and retrieval fee shall be waived and the shopping
cart shall be returned.
   (B)   The Mayor, or the Mayor’s duly authorized representative, shall,
within ten working days after the conclusion of the hearing, give written
notice of his or her decision to the party or parties who filed the appeal. The
notice shall contain the decision and the reasons therefor. The decision of the
Mayor, or the Mayor’s duly authorized representative, shall be final and
conclusive and shall not be subject to any further appeal. Pursuant to Cal.
Code of Civil Procedure, § 1094.6, any action to review said decision shall be
commenced not later than the ninetieth day after the date of the written notice
of decision.
(Ord. MC-1038, passed 1-12-1999)
ARTICLE II. SPECIFIC BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 5.28: AUTOMOBILE WRECKERS
Section
   
5.28.010   Copy of notification to Police Department
§ 5.28.010 COPY OF NOTIFICATION TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   Any licensed automobile wrecker who, as a transferee, obtains actual
possession of a vehicle subject to registration under Cal. Vehicle Code,
Division 5, Chapter 3 (commencing with § 11500) or other law for the purpose of
wrecking or dismantling shall forward a copy of the notification required by
Cal. Vehicle Code, § 11520 to the City Police Department.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 2455, passed 8-13-1962)
CHAPTER 5.30: SIDEWALK VENDING
Section
   
5.30.010   Purpose and intent
   
5.30.020   Definitions
   
5.30.030   Permits required
   
5.30.040   Review of permit application; decision
   
5.30.050   Renewal of sidewalk vending permit
   
5.30.060   Stationary sidewalk vending locations and standards
   
5.30.070   Sidewalk vending in parks, certified farmers’ markets
   
5.30.080   Roaming sidewalk vending
   
5.30.090   Suspension; rescission
   
5.30.100   Appeals
   
5.30.110   Compliance with all applicable state laws
   
5.30.120   Penalties
§ 5.30.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The vending of prepared or pre-packaged foods, goods and/or wares at semi-
permanent locations on public sidewalks and rights-of-way may pose unsafe
conditions and special dangers to the public health, safety and welfare of
residents and visitors. The purpose of this chapter is to implement regulations
on both roaming and stationary sidewalk vending that protect the public health,
safety and welfare of the community while complying with the requirements of
general state law, as amended from time to time, to promote safe vending
practices; prevent safety, traffic and health hazards; and preserve the public
peace, safety and welfare of the community.
(Ord. MC-1517, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 5.30.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS. Agricultural, horticultural, viticultural and dairy
products, livestock and the products thereof, the products of poultry and bee
raising, the edible products of forestry and any and all products raised or
produced on farms and processed or manufactured products thereof. AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTS does not include cannabis or cannabis products.
   CERTIFIED FARMERS’ MARKET. A location operated in accordance with the Cal.
Food and Agricultural Code, Division 17, Chapter 10.5 (commencing with § 47000)
and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino.
   COUNTY. The County of San Bernardino.
   DIRECTOR OF FINANCE AND MANAGEMENT SERVICES. The Director of Finance and
Management Services, or his or her designee.
   PARK. A public park owned by the city.
   ROAMING SIDEWALK VENDOR or VENDING. A sidewalk vendor who moves from place
to place and stops only to complete a transaction.
   SIDEWALK VENDOR or VENDING. A person who sells, offers to sell, operates,
engages in or carries on a food or merchandise vending business from a
pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack or other
non-motorized conveyance, or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk,
property or other pedestrian path.
   STATIONARY SIDEWALK VENDOR. A person who sells, offers to sell, operates,
engages in or carries on a food or merchandise vending business from a fixed
location without assistance from a transport.
   SWAP MEET. A location operated in accordance with the Cal. Business and
Professions Code, Division 8, Chapter 9, Article 6 (commencing with § 21660),
and any regulations adopted pursuant to that article.
   TEMPORARY EVENT PERMIT. Any use as permitted under Chapter 19.70.
(Ord. MC-1517, passed 6-19-2019; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.30.030 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   All sidewalk vendors shall obtain a sidewalk vending permit from
the City Business Registration Division prior to engaging in any sidewalk
vending activities.
      (2)   The following information shall be required:
         (a)   Name, current mailing address and phone number of the vendor;
         (b)   If the vendor is an agent of an individual, company, partnership
or corporation, the name and business address of the principal;
         (c)   A description of the merchandise/ goods to be offered for sale
or exchange and the days/hours of sales;
         (d)   A copy of the state seller’s permit with the sales tax number
issued by the State Department of Tax and Fee Administration to the vendor;
         (e)   The vendor must present a valid identification, such as a state
identification, Matricula Consular or any other government-issued
identification card;
         (f)   If preparing or selling food, a copy of a current County Public
Health Department permit issued to the vendor;
         (g)   If vendor is selling food, a current decal sticker posted on the
food cart issued by the County Public Health Department;
         (h)   If the vendor proposes to be a sidewalk vendor, a description or
site plan map of the proposed location(s) where vending will take place,
showing that the sidewalk location maintains a minimum of 36 inches of
accessible route area, in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.;
         (i)   If the vendor proposes to be a sidewalk vendor, an encroachment
permit pursuant to §
12.03.060;
         (j)   A copy of general liability policy naming the city as additional
insured in the amount of $1,000,000; and
         (k)   A certification by the vendor that, to his or her knowledge and
belief, the information contained in the application is true.
   (B)   At the time the application or renewal application is filed, the
application shall pay the permit processing fee established by separate
resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. MC-1517, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 5.30.040 REVIEW OF PERMIT APPLICATION; DECISION.
   (A)   Denial of application. The Director of Finance and Management Services
may deny an application for a permit if he or she makes any of the following
findings:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to pay the application permit fee;
      (2)   The applicant has made one or more material misstatements in the
application for a permit;
      (3)   The applicant’s vending operation, as described in the application,
is inconsistent with the standards, conditions and requirements of this
chapter; or
      (4)   It is determined that the applicant does not possess all federal,
state and local permits and licenses necessary to engage in the activity in
which he or she seeks to engage.
   (B)   Notice of denial. If the application is denied, the reasons for
disapproval shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be
notified that his or her application is denied and that no permit will be
issued. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the
application form.
   (C)   Approval of permit. If the Director of Finance and Management Services
approves the applicant’s permit, he or she shall endorse his or her approval on
the application and shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, deliver the
permit to the applicant.
   (D)   Exemptions. A sidewalk vending permit shall not be required for the
following activities:
      (1)   The sale of agriculture products on the site where the product is
grown. As defined in §
5.30.020, AGRICULTURE PRODUCTS does not include cannabis. Sale of cannabis
products must adhere to regulations as stipulated in
Chapter 5.10;
      (2)   Catering for private parties held exclusively on private property
and not open to the general public; and
      (3)   Events permitted pursuant to a lawfully issued temporary event
permit, including, but not limited to, a certified farmers’ market, swap meet,
street fairs, outdoor concerts, sport league opening day and business sidewalk
sales.
   (E)   Term of permit. A sidewalk vending permit issued pursuant to this
chapter shall automatically expire one year from the date issued, unless an
earlier expiration date is noted on the permit.
   (F)   Transferability. A sidewalk vending permit shall not be transferable
to any other entity or person and is valid only as to the original applicant
for the term stated.
(Ord. MC-1517, passed 6-19-2019; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.30.050 RENEWAL OF SIDEWALK VENDING PERMIT.
   All sidewalk vendors shall annually apply for renewal of their sidewalk
vending permit from the City Director of Finance and Management Services prior
to continuing to engage in any sidewalk vending activities. Any sidewalk vendor
who currently possesses a sidewalk vending permit allowing him, her or it to
operate a vending operation must, upon time of renewal of his, her or its
license, apply for a sidewalk vending permit, supplying the information as
required in §
5.30.030.
(Ord. MC-1517, passed 6-19-2019; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.30.060 STATIONARY SIDEWALK VENDING LOCATIONS AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   Stationary sidewalk vendors shall be prohibited from operating or
establishing in any residential zone of the city.
   (B)   Stationary sidewalk vendors may operate in non-residential zones of
the city, including mixed use zones, provided they meet the following:
      (1)   The sidewalk vendor is duly licensed and meets all requirements of
§
5.30.030;
      (2)   The sidewalk vendor can set up his or her vending operation while
still leaving a minimum of 36 inches of accessible path of travel, without
obstruction, along the public sidewalk or public pathway;
      (3)   If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, the sidewalk vendor shall
display a valid health permit issued by the county in a conspicuous location on
the food cart;
      (4)   If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, all employees shall possess
a current food handlers card, issued by the county;
      (5)   Sidewalk vendor food cart shall possess a current decal sticker
posted on the food cart;
      (6)   Sidewalk vending hours shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 3:00 a.m. the following day;
      (7)   The sidewalk vendor maintains the vending area in a clean, orderly
and sanitary condition;
      (8)   The sidewalk vendor location does not block entrances to private
buildings, private driveways, parking spaces or building windows;
      (9)   No vending shall occur within ten feet of a fire hydrant, fire
escape, bus stop, loading zone, handicapped parking space or access ramp, fire
station driveway or police station driveway;
      (10)   No tables, chairs, fences, shade structures, other site furniture
or any freestanding signs shall be permitted in conjunction with the vendors
vending activities;
      (11)   The vendor shall not attach or use any water lines, electrical
lines or gas lines during vending operations;
      (12)   Exterior storage or display of refuse, equipment, materials,
goods, wares or merchandise associated with the vendor is prohibited;
      (13)   No vending shall occur within the immediate vicinity of a
certified farmers’ market, a swap meet or an event held pursuant to a temporary
event permit; and
      (14)   The sidewalk vendor shall not discharge any liquid (e.g., water,
grease, oil and the like) onto or into the city streets, storm drains, catch
basins or sewer facilities. All discharges shall be contained and properly
disposed of by the vendor.
(Ord. MC-1517, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 5.30.070 SIDEWALK VENDING IN PARKS, CERTIFIED FARMERS’ MARKETS.
   (A)   Sidewalk vending of food or merchandise by roaming or stationary
vendors shall be prohibited in any city park with a concession stand operated
by a vendor under exclusive contract with the city selling similar food or
merchandise or in an area occupied by a certified farmers’ market.
   (B)   Subject to division (A) above, sidewalk vendors may operate in city
parks; provided they meet the following:
      (1)   The sidewalk vendor is duly licensed and meets all requirements of
§
5.30.030(A);
      (2)   For stationary sidewalk vending, the sidewalk vendor can set up
their vending operation while still leaving a minimum of 36 inches of
accessible path of travel, without obstruction, along the public sidewalk or
public pathway;
      (3)   The sidewalk vendor shall cease operations one hour prior to the
close of the park;
      (4)   The sidewalk vendor maintains the vending area in a clean, orderly
and sanitary condition;
      (5)   If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, the sidewalk vendor shall
display a valid health permit issued by the county in a conspicuous location on
the food cart;
      (6)   If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, all employees shall possess
a current food handlers card, issued by the county;
      (7)   Sidewalk vendor food cart shall possess a current decal sticker
posted on the food cart;
      (8)   The sidewalk vendor location does not block entrances to buildings,
driveways, parking spaces or building windows;
      (9)   No vending shall occur within the immediate vicinity of an event
held pursuant to a temporary event permit;
      (10)   In city parks that are located within a residential zone, where
stationary sidewalk vending is prohibited, as described in division (A) above,
only roaming sidewalk vendors shall be allowed in such parks; and
      (11)   The city can impose regulations to limit the number of sidewalk
vendors in city parks to limit the undue concentration of commercial activity
that unreasonable interferes with the scenic and natural character of the park
or necessary to endure the public’s use and enjoyment of the natural resources
and recreational opportunities of city parks.
(Ord. MC-1517, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 5.30.080 ROAMING SIDEWALK VENDING.
   Roaming sidewalk vendors shall meet the following:
   (A)   The sidewalk vendor is duly licensed and meets all requirements of §
5.30.030(A);
   (B)   If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, the sidewalk vendor shall
display a valid health permit issued by the county in a conspicuous location on
the food cart;
   (C)   If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, all employees shall possess a
current food handlers card, issued by the county;
   (D)   Sidewalk vendor food cart shall possess a current decal sticker posted
on the food cart;
   (E)   Sidewalk vending hours for residential zones shall be conducted
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.;
   (F)   Sidewalk vending hours for non-residential zones shall be conducted
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of every day;
   (G)   The sidewalk vendor maintains their temporary vending area in a clean,
orderly and sanitary condition;
   (H)   The sidewalk vendor does not block entrances to buildings, driveways,
parking spaces or building windows;
   (I)   The sidewalk vendor does not conduct sales from a public street;
   (J)   No vending shall occur within the immediate vicinity of a certified
farmers’ market, a swap meet or an event held pursuant to a temporary event
permit; and
   (K)   The vendor shall not discharge any liquid (e.g., water, grease, oil
and the like) onto or into city streets, storm drains, catch basins or sewer
facilities. All discharges shall be contained and properly disposed of by the
vendor.
(Ord. MC-1517, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 5.30.090 SUSPENSION; RESCISSION.
   (A)   A sidewalk vendor permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or
rescinded by the Director of Finance and Management Services after four or more
violations of this chapter, for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of vending;
      (2)   Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the permit; and/
or
      (3)   Vending in a manner that creates a public nuisance or constitutes a
danger to the public.
   (B)   Notice of the suspension or rescission of a sidewalk vendor permit
issued under this chapter shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the holder of
the sidewalk vendor permit at his or her last known address.
   (C)   No person whose street vending permit has been revoked pursuant to
this chapter shall be issued a street vending permit for a period of two years
from the date revocation becomes final.
(Ord. MC-1517, passed 6-19-2019; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.30.100 APPEALS.
   In the event that any applicant or permittee desires to appeal from any
order, rescission or other ruling of the Director of Finance and Management
Services made under the provisions of this chapter, such applicant or any other
person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal such action or decision in
accordance with §
8.30.030.
(Ord. MC-1517, passed 6-19-2019; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.30.110 COMPLIANCE WITH ALL APPLICABLE STATE LAWS.
   It is the intent of this chapter to regulate sidewalk street vendors in
compliance with all provisions of the Safe Sidewalk Vending Act. It is also the
intent of this provision for sidewalk vendors to comply with all applicable
state and local laws.
(Ord. MC-1517, passed 6-19-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Safe Sidewalk Vending Act, see Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 51036 through 51039
§ 5.30.120 PENALTIES.
   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail
to comply with any requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   A violation of this chapter shall by punished by:
         (a)   An administrative fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation;
         (b)   An administrative fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation
within one year of the first violation; and
         (c)   An administrative fine not exceeding $500 for each additional
violation within one year of the first violation.
   (B)   A violation of vending without a sidewalk vending permit may, in lieu
of the penalties set forth in division (A) set forth above, be punished by:
      (1)   An administrative fine not exceeding $250 for a first violation;
      (2)   An administrative fine not exceeding $500 for a second violation
within one year of the first violation; and
      (3)   An administrative fine not exceeding $1,000 for each additional
violation within one year of the first violation.
   (C)   If an individual is subject to division (B) above for vending without
a sidewalk vending permit, upon the individual providing proof of a valid
permit issued by the city, the administrative fines set forth in this chapter
shall be reduced to the administrative fines set forth in division (A) above,
respectively.
   (D)   The proceeds of any administrative fines assessed pursuant to this
chapter shall be deposited in the City Treasury.
   (E)   Failure to pay an administrative fine assessed under this chapter
shall not be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor. Additional fines,
fees, assessments or any other financial conditions beyond those authorized in
this chapter shall not be assessed.
   (F)   Any violation of this chapter shall not be punishable as an infraction
or misdemeanor, and any person alleged to have violated any provisions of this
chapter shall not be subject to arrest except when otherwise permitted under
law.
   (G)   When assessing an administrative fine pursuant to this chapter, the
adjudicator shall take into consideration the person’s ability to pay the fine.
The city shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to request an
ability-to-pay determination and shall make available instructions or other
materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination. The person may
request an ability-to-pay determination at adjudication or while the judgment
remains unpaid, including when a case is delinquent or has been referred to a
comprehensive collection program.
      (1)   If the person meets the criteria described in Cal. Gov’t Code, §
68632(a) or (b), the city shall accept, in full satisfaction, 20% of the
administrative fine imposed pursuant to this chapter.
      (2)   The city may allow the person to complete community service in lieu
of paying the total administrative fine, may waive the administrative fine or
may offer an alternative disposition.
   (H)   A person who is currently serving, or who completed, a sentence, or
who is subject to a fine, for a conviction of a misdemeanor or infraction for
sidewalk vending, whether by trial or by open or negotiated plea, who would not
have been guilty of that offense under SB 946 (being Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 51036
through 51039) had SB 946 been in effect at the time of the offense, may
petition for dismissal of the sentence, fine or conviction before the trial
court that entered the judgment of conviction in his or her case.
   (I)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to impede the city’s or
county’s ability to enforce County Health Department codes, regulations and
ordinances.
(Ord. MC-1517, passed 6-19-2019; Ord. MC-1545, passed 10-7-2020)
CHAPTER 5.32: BILLIARD ROOMS AND POOLROOMS
Section
   
5.32.010   License and permit - required
   
5.32.020   Permit - application
   
5.32.030   Permit - condition and unlawful acts
   
5.32.040   Violations of laws on lotteries, gaming or gambling
   
5.32.050   Profanity
   
5.32.060   Responsibility of owner for enforcement
   
5.32.070   Signs to be posted setting forth rules and regulations
   
5.32.080   Games open to public view when
   
5.32.090   Imposition of condition upon issuance of permit
   
5.32.100   Investigation fee
   
5.32.110   Suspension or revocation of permit
   
5.32.120   Reserved
§ 5.32.010 LICENSE AND PERMIT - REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal, officer, clerk, agent
or employee, either for himself or herself or for any other person, to engage
in, conduct, carry on or maintain the business, trade, occupation or calling of
conducting a billiard room or poolroom in the city without first having
procured therefor a license from the City Clerk and a permit in writing from
the City Council.
(Ord. 2589, passed 6-23-1964)
§ 5.32.020 PERMIT - APPLICATION.
   Any person who desires to procure a permit for conducting or maintaining in
the city a billiard room or poolroom shall make application therefor in writing
to the City Clerk. Such application shall be made on a form prescribed by the
City Clerk, and shall be verified by one of the applicants. Such application
shall set forth the name of the applicant or applicants, the location of such
proposed business and the number of billiard or pool tables intended to be kept
therein.
(Ord. 2589, passed 6-23-1964)
§ 5.32.030 PERMIT - CONDITION AND UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Each permit shall be conditional upon, and it is unlawful:
      (1)   For any person under the age of 18 years to enter and remain in any
establishment where any billiard or pool table is maintained for public use or
hire unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or unless said parent
or guardian has signed in the presence of the owner thereof, an annual written
consent and permission for attendance by such person when he or she was of the
age of 14 or more years;
      (2)   For the management of any establishment where any billiard or pool
table is maintained for public use or hire to permit a person under the age of
18 years to enter and remain in such establishment unless accompanied by his or
her parent or guardian, or unless said parent or guardian has signed in the
presence of the owner thereof, an annual written consent and permission for
attendance by such person when he or she was of the age of 14 or more years;
      (3)   For any person under the age of 18 years to enter and remain in any
establishment where any billiard or pool table is maintained for public use or
hire after the hour of 10:00 p.m.;
      (4)   For the management of any establishment where any billiard or pool
table is maintained for public use or hire to permit a person under the age of
18 years to enter and remain in such an establishment after the hour of 10:00
p.m.;
      (5)   For any person under the age of 21 years to violate any law
pertaining to alcoholic beverages in any establishment where any billiard or
pool table is maintained for public use or hire;
      (6)   For the management of any establishment where any billiard or pool
table is maintained for public use or hire to violate any law pertaining to
alcoholic beverages; and
      (7)   For the management of any establishment where any billiard or pool
table is maintained for public use or hire to fail to have an employee of the
age of 21 years or older in attendance at all times when the establishment is
open to the public.
   (B)   MANAGEMENT includes owner, lessee or any agent, employee,
representative or concessionaire of such owner or lessee.
   (C)   For the purpose of preventing the violation of any portion of this
section, the management shall refuse to permit any person to remain in any
establishment where any billiard or pool table is maintained for public use or
hire who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of his or her age, or
in the event such person is under the age of 18 years, who is not accompanied
by his or her parent or guardian, or for whom there is not an annual written
consent and permission document on file with the management.
(Ord. 2589, passed 6-23-1964; Ord. 2598, passed 7-25-1964)
§ 5.32.040 VIOLATIONS OF LAWS ON LOTTERIES, GAMING OR GAMBLING.
   It is unlawful for any person to violate any law pertaining to lotteries,
gaming or gambling on the premises of the billiard room or poolroom.
(Ord. 2589, passed 6-23-1964)
§ 5.32.050 PROFANITY.
   No profanity of any kind shall be used, suffered, allowed or permitted on
the premises of the billiard room or poolroom.
(Ord. 2589, passed 6-23-1964)
§ 5.32.060 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   The owners, managers and operators, and each of them, of the billiard room
or poolroom shall be strictly responsible for the enforcement of all required
rules and regulations, and shall not permit any person violating any rule or
regulation to remain in such billiard room or poolroom, and shall not permit
any habitual violator to enter such billiard room or poolroom.
(Ord. 2589, passed 6-23-1964)
§ 5.32.070 SIGNS TO BE POSTED SETTING FORTH RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   At least four signs shall be posted and maintained at conspicuous places in
and about the billiard room or poolroom, printed in bold one-inch high letters
placed on a contrasting background, and setting forth the substance of the
rules and regulations contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 2589, passed 6-23-1964)
§ 5.32.080 GAMES OPEN TO PUBLIC VIEW WHEN.
   When any room or place is maintained where games of billiards, pool or
bagatelle are conducted for profit, which room or place is a part or portion of
a business affording amusement or recreational games for which a fee is
charged, said games shall be, at all times, open to public view from the
sidewalk or street right-of-way adjoining the room or place; and any partitions
between the room or place and other game areas shall be made of not less than
50% transparent glass between a point three feet above the floor and a point
six feet above the floor.
(Ord. 2589, passed 6-23-1964)
§ 5.32.090 IMPOSITION OF CONDITION UPON ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The City Council may impose any reasonable condition upon the issuance of
the permit in addition to the conditions and regulations set forth in this
chapter
(Ord. 2589, passed 6-23-1964)
§ 5.32.100 INVESTIGATION FEE.
   At the time of filing each original application, the applicant shall pay to
the City Clerk an application investigation fee of $25 for each location or
address where it is proposed to conduct a billiard room or poolroom. If the
application is denied, such fee shall not be refunded.
(Ord. 2589, passed 6-23-1964)
§ 5.32.110 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Any permit issued for a billiard room or poolroom may be revoked or
suspended for a violation of any of the conditions of the permit, or of the
provisions of this chapter or other provisions of law, or for good cause, which
shall include, but not be limited to, a material misstatement in the
application for the permit, or conduct which does not comport with the public
welfare. No permit shall be revoked for any cause or violation until a public
hearing has been held thereon by the City Council, and the permittee has been
given five days’ notice in writing of the time and place of such hearing either
by United States mail, or by personal service, and a brief statement of
specific charges; provided that any permit may be suspended by the Mayor,
pending the holding of a public hearing as provided above, by causing a written
notice of such temporary suspension to be delivered to the permittee
personally, or to his or her manager.
(Ord. 2589, passed 6-23-1964)
§ 5.32.120 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 5.36: BINGO GAMES
Section
   
5.36.010   Definitions
   
5.36.015   Remote caller bingo - authorization
   
5.36.020   License - required
   
5.36.030   License - fee and investigation fee
   
5.36.040   License - application
   
5.36.050   License - issuance
   
5.36.060   Operation of bingo game
   
5.36.065   Operation of remote caller bingo games
   
5.36.070   Financial interest
   
5.36.080   Accounts for profits and proceeds
   
5.36.090   Participation limited to those present
   
5.36.100   Bingo game open to public
   
5.36.110   Value of prizes
   
5.36.120   Minors prohibited from participation
   
5.36.130   Display of license
   
5.36.140   License not transferable
   
5.36.150   Suspension or revocation of license
   
5.36.160   Disciplinary action - grounds
   
5.36.170   Procedure
   
5.36.180   Pending revocation or suspension - proceedings effect on license
   
5.36.190   License renewal - effect of pendency of proceeding to suspend or
revoke license
   
5.36.200   Fictitious name
Statutory reference:
   For provisions authorizing bingo games for charity, see Cal. Penal Code §
326.5
§ 5.36.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BINGO. A game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of
designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols
selected at random. BINGO shall be conducted in accordance with the applicable
statutes of the State of California.
   MINORS. All persons defined as minors under Cal. Family Code, § 6500.
   NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION. An organization exempted by the bank and
corporation tax by Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, §§ 23701a, 23701b, 23701d,
23701e, 23701f, 23701g and 23701.
   PRIZES. Cash, kind or both for each separate game which is held.
   REMOTE CALLER BINGO. A game of bingo, as defined in Cal. Penal Code, § 326.3
(u)(1).
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. 3684, passed 11-9-1977; Ord. 3976, passed
10-8-1980; Ord. MC-146, passed 3-16-1982; Ord. MC-486, passed 12-4-1985; Ord.
MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.015 REMOTE CALLER BINGO - AUTHORIZATION.
   Remote caller bingo is added to this chapter pursuant to § 19 of Article IV
of the California Constitution, as implemented by Cal. Penal Code, §§ 326.3 and
326.4.
(Ord. MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.020 LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership
or organization other than a non-profit organization, mobile home park
association or senior citizen organization to conduct bingo games. Such
organizations or associations shall not conduct bingo games without first
securing a license to conduct such games from the City Clerk as hereinafter
provided, and the receipts of such games shall be used only for charitable
purposes.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. 3684, passed 11-9-977; Ord. MC-146, passed
3-16-1982; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 5.36.030 LICENSE - FEE AND INVESTIGATION FEE.
   (A)   An annual license fee, in the amount to be set by resolution, shall be
paid upon the approval of each application for license for the purpose of
defraying the expense incidental to the processing of such application.
   (B)   At the time of filing of the application for a license, the applicant
shall also pay to the City Clerk an investigation fee in an amount to be
determined by resolution. This fee is for the purpose of defraying the costs of
the inspection of the premises upon which the bingo games are to be conducted
and of investigating the qualifications of the applicant.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.040 LICENSE - APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applicants for bingo licenses shall file a written, signed and
acknowledged application with the City Clerk, showing:
      (1)   The name and address of applicant;
      (2)   The day, dates, hours and locations where the bingo games will be
operated;
      (3)   The name or names of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the games;
      (4)   The maximum number of participants expected on the premises;
      (5)   Whether food and beverages will be available; and
      (6)   Such other reasonable information as may be required as to the
identity or character of the applicant, manager or members of applicant
operating the games.
   (B)   If the applicant is a non-profit organization, the application shall
be accompanied by a copy of the tax exempt status determination issued by the
State Franchise Tax Board to the applicant organization.
   (C)   If the applicant does not own the premises for which the license is
sought, the applicant shall submit with the application a copy of the lease
under which the applicant has the right to use such premises. If the use of the
premises is donated, a copy of the agreement under which the applicant has the
right to use the premises shall be submitted.
   (D)   For remote caller bingo, applicants must also submit a copy of the
executed agreement between the applicant and the provider of the equipment to
be used.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. 3684, passed 11-9-1977; Ord. MC-146, passed
3-16-1982; Ord. MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.050 LICENSE - ISSUANCE.
   (A)   (1)   When an application is filed, the City Clerk shall refer the
application to the Department of Community Development and Housing, the Fire
Department, the Police Department and to all other interested departments of
the city for investigation. The Department of Community Development and
Housing, Fire Department and the Police Department shall make reports of their
findings, together with recommendations as to whether or not the applicant
should be granted a license, to the City Clerk within 20 working days after the
application was referred to them. The license shall be issued for a specified
location and shall specify the maximum number of participants permitted on the
premises. The license shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year
from the date of issuance.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the application, or whenever there is a change of
officers of the organization or in the position of game manager, the Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, shall make an investigation regarding the
character and moral fitness of applicants, the cost of which investigation
shall be borne by the applicants, pursuant to Cal. Penal Code, § 326.5(l)(1)
and (l)(2), in an amount set by resolution. This investigation shall include
the obtaining of criminal history statements, through fingerprints, for all
officers/board members and game manager(s) associated with the day-to-day
operation of the game. The purpose of this investigation is to determine those
persons who have been convicted of crimes involving lotteries, gambling,
larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion, fraud or similar crimes involving moral
turpitude. If any person investigated does in fact have a criminal record, or
presents any cause for concern related to the community’s public health, peace,
safety or welfare, such person shall be notified in writing and the license
suspended until such person is removed from the application or does not
participate in bingo operations. Such person shall not, at any time in the
future, be permitted to participate in any way in any bingo operation licensed
under this chapter. Any person objecting to the Chief of Police’s
determination, pursuant to this division (A), may appeal to the City Manager,
or designee, provided he or she files a notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within ten days of the Chief of Police’s determination.
   (B)   An applicant shall not be entitled to more than one license in the
city; provided, however, that a church or non-profit organization, which is
subsidiary to or affiliated with an organization operating throughout the state
or nation, and which is separately and independently operated and staffed
locally, shall be considered as an individual applicant for purposes of this
chapter.
   (C)   Licenses are not transferable and there are no rebates if the bingo
operation licensed under this chapter is discontinued during the period for
which the license was issued.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. 3724, passed 5-4-1978; Ord. MC-1027, passed
9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.36.060 OPERATION OF BINGO GAME.
   (A)   A bingo game shall be conducted only on property owned or leased by,
or donated to, the licensed organization or association and used by it for an
office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization or
association is organized. Use solely for the purposes of conducting bingo games
is not an acceptable use. The bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by
members of the licensed organization or association which organized the game,
except that security personnel may be employed. No person may receive or pay a
profit, wage or salary from the receipts of any bingo game, except that
security personnel employed by the organization conducting the bingo game may
be paid from the revenues of bingo games. Only the organization or association
licensed to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the
promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game.
   (B)   Bingo games shall not be held:
      (1)   For more than two sessions in any one week;
      (2)   For more than five hours in any 24-hour period; or
      (3)   Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any one day.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. 3684, passed 11-9-1977; Ord. MC-146, passed
3-16-1982; Ord. MC-314, passed 11-7-1983; Ord. MC-486, passed 12-4-1985; Ord.
MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014; Ord. MC-1520, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 5.36.065 OPERATION OF REMOTE CALLER BINGO GAMES.
   Remote caller bingo games may be conducted in the city subject and pursuant
to the following provisions.
   (A)   Remote caller bingo games may be conducted by any organization
eligible to receive a valid traditional bingo license issued pursuant to §
5.36.020 if:
      (1)   The organization has been incorporated or in existence for three
years or more; and
      (2)   The organization obtains approval from the Chief of Police as
provided in §
5.36.050
   (B)   Remote caller bingo games shall be conducted in compliance with Cal.
Penal Code, §§ 326.3 and 326.4 and all other applicable local and state laws
and regulations.
   (C)   Remote caller bingo games shall not be conducted by any licensee more
than two days during any week, except that a licensee may hold one additional
game, at its election, in each calendar quarter.
   (D)   The licensee shall keep full and accurate records of the income and
expenses received and distributed in connection with its operation, conduct,
promotion, supervision and any other phase of remote caller bingo games which
are authorized by this chapter. The city shall have the right to examine and
audit such records at any reasonable time, and the licensee shall fully
cooperate with the city by making such records available.
   (E)   In addition to the requirements of division (D) above, the licensee
shall submit copies of any state mandated audits, including, but not limited
to, those required pursuant to Cal. Penal Code, § 326.3(w)(2), to the Chief of
Police within five days of his or her submission to the applicable state
agency.
   (F)   Except as authorized by Cal. Penal Code, § 326.3, it is a misdemeanor
for any person to receive profit, wage or salary from any remote caller bingo
game authorized as provided in Article IV, § 19 of the California Constitution.
   (G)   Violations of division (F) above shall be punishable by an
administrative fine not to exceed $10,000, which fine shall be deposited in the
General Fund of the city.
   (H)   The licensed organization is responsible for ensuring that the
conditions of this chapter and Cal. Penal Code, §§ 326.3 and 326.4 are complied
with by the organization and its officers and members. A violation of any one
or more of these conditions shall constitute cause for the revocation of the
organization’s license. At the request of the organization, the city shall hold
a public hearing before revoking any license issued pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.070 FINANCIAL INTEREST.
   It is unlawful for any individual, corporation, partnership or other legal
entity except the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game to hold a
financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1401,
passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.080 ACCOUNTS FOR PROFITS AND PROCEEDS.
   (A)   All profits derived from a bingo game by organizations exempt from
payment of the bank and corporation tax by the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code,
§ 23701d shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled
with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable
purposes.
   (B)   (1)   With respect to all other licensees, all receipts derived from a
bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be
commingled with any other fund or account.
      (2)   Such proceeds shall be used for charitable purposes, except as
follows:
         (a)   Such proceeds may be used for prizes;
         (b)   A portion of such proceeds not to exceed 20% of the proceeds
before the deduction for prizes, or $1,000 per month, whichever is less, may be
used for rental of property, overhead, the purchase of bingo or security
equipment, administrative expenses and security personnel; and
         (c)   Such proceeds may be used to pay license fees.
   (C)   Records required by this section shall be retained for a period of
three years. The licensee’s books and records shall be available for inspection
by the Chief of Police or the City Clerk, or their designated representative,
upon reasonable notice.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. 3684, passed 11-9-1977; Ord. 3976, passed
10-8-1980; Ord. MC-146, passed 3-16-1982; Ord. MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.090 PARTICIPATION LIMITED TO THOSE PRESENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to allow a person not physically present at
the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted to participate.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1401,
passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.100 BINGO GAME OPEN TO PUBLIC.
   All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just the members of the
licensed organization or association.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. 3684, passed 11-9-1977; Ord. MC-1401,
passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.110 VALUE OF PRIZES.
   The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall
not exceed $500 for each separate game which is held.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014; Ord. MC-1520,
passed 6-19-2019)
§ 5.36.120 MINORS PROHIBITED FROM PARTICIPATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to allow a minor to participate in any bingo
game.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1401,
passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.130 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensee shall display the license issued by the city in a conspicuous
place in the premises where the bingo games are conducted.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.140 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Each license issued under this chapter shall be issued to a specific
organization or association for a specific location and shall in no event be
transferable from one organization or location to another.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. 3684, passed 11-9-1977; Ord. MC-1401,
passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.150 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The City Council may, upon its own motion or upon the verified complaint in
writing of any person, investigate the actions of any licensee and may
temporarily suspend, for a period not exceeding one year, or revoke the permit
of any licensee which commits any one or more of the acts or omissions
constituting grounds for disciplinary action under this chapter.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.160 DISCIPLINARY ACTION - GROUNDS.
   It shall be a ground for denial, revocation or other disciplinary action of
any applicant, licensee, the agent or employee or any person connected or
associated with the applicant or licensee as partner, director, officer,
stockholder, general manager or person exercising managerial authority of or on
behalf of the licensee if such organization or person has:
   (A)   Knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a
material fact in an application for a license, or in any report or record
required to be filed with the City Clerk;
   (B)   Violated any provision of this chapter or of any statute relating to
the permitted activity;
   (C)   Been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude;
   (D)   A bad moral character, intemperate habits or a bad reputation for
truth, honesty or integrity;
   (E)   Committed any unlawful, false, fraudulent, deceptive or dangerous act
while conducting permitted bingo games;
   (F)   Violated any rule or regulation adopted by the City Council relating
to the licensed bingo games;
   (G)   Conducted the permitted bingo game in a manner contrary to the peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the public; or
   (H)   Failed to comply with zoning, building and safety; health regulations;
all applicable local and state fire regulations; and all laws of the city.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.170 PROCEDURE.
   An applicant or licensee may, within ten days after service of a written
notice of denial of a license or suspension or revocation of his or her
license, file a request for a hearing with the City Council. The request for a
hearing shall be in writing and signed by or on behalf of the applicant or
licensee. It need not be verified or follow any particular form. Failure to
file such a request for a hearing shall constitute a waiver of the licensee’s
right to a hearing.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.180 PENDING REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION - PROCEEDINGS EFFECT ON LICENSE.
   Pending the final determination of a proceeding for revocation or suspension
of a license, a licensee may continue to operate bingo games until the Council
makes such final determination.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.190 LICENSE RENEWAL - EFFECT OF PENDENCY OF PROCEEDING TO SUSPEND OR
REVOKE LICENSE.
   (A)   A licensee may file an application for renewal of a license. Renewal
application should be filed at least 30 days prior to expiration of the license
period. In the event a renewal application is filed during the pendency of a
proceeding to suspend or revoke the license, such filing shall continue such
license in full force and effect until the entry of the final order by the
Council terminating proceedings.
   (B)   Failure of the Council to revoke, suspend, limit or condition the
license shall have the effect of granting the license. The application for
renewal shall become a part of the pending proceeding and be subject to all
evidence which has been or is thereafter presented. No further notice to the
applicant is required and the Council is authorized to consider and make
findings upon such application in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 5.36.200 FICTITIOUS NAME.
   It is unlawful for any person or persons to sign a fictitious name or
fictitious address in connection with applications submitted pursuant to this
chapter.
(Ord. 3606, passed 10-26-1976; Ord. MC-1401, passed 6-2-2014)
CHAPTER 5.40: CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS IN CENTRAL CITY MALL
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1486, passed 4-18-2018)
CHAPTER 5.42: OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1414, passed 7-6-2015)
CHAPTER 5.44: COIN-OPERATED GAME MACHINES
Section
   
5.44.010   Definitions
   
5.44.020   Permit - required
   
5.44.025   Responsibilities of business operators upon whose premises games
machines are found
   
5.44.030   Operator’s permit - application
   
5.44.040   Investigation
   
5.44.050   Issuance of permits
   
5.44.060   Hearing upon denial of permit
   
5.44.070   Game machine tag
   
5.44.080   Display of tag or plate
   
5.44.085   Display of information concerning distributor
   
5.44.086   Untagged machines; nuisance; reconnection fees; administrative fees
   
5.44.090   Transfer of permit
   
5.44.100   Revocation of permit
   
5.44.110   Permit in addition to business license or other permit
   
5.44.120   Prohibited devices
   
5.44.130   Violation - penalty
§ 5.44.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COIN-OPERATED GAME MACHINE. Any machine, device or apparatus which is used
as a game or contest of any description or for amusement, or which may be used
for any such game or contest or for amusement and the operation or use of which
is permitted, controlled or made possible by the deposit or placing of any
coin, plate, disc, slug or key into any slot, crevice or other opening, or by
the payment of any fee or fees in lieu thereof, except a machine, device or
apparatus used or offered for use, by children for rides, or as a hobby horse
or for the viewing of miniature cartoons or “kiddie theater” films in
establishments or areas reserved for the use of children under the age of 14
years and their parents or guardians or by any person for playing or rendering
music or as a test of strength or endurance.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation or association.
The singular use includes the plural.
(Ord. 3470, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. 3542, passed 12-11-1975; Ord. 3562, passed
3-17-1976)
§ 5.44.020 PERMIT - REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
renting, operating, leasing, selling or maintaining coin-operated game machines
in the city without first having secured a permit from the city to do so. A
violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable
by a $500 fine or six months in the county jail, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
      (2)   The following persons owning or operating local business
establishments are exempt from the game machine operator permit requirements of
this chapter:
         (a)   A person owning, operating and maintaining not more than two
coin-operated machines as an incidental business used at a local place of
business having the requisite business license pursuant to Article I of this
title; and
         (b)   A person leasing coin-operated game machines at a local place of
business from a person having a permit under this chapter.
   (B)   Any person required to obtain a permit under this chapter is
hereinafter referred to in this chapter as a “game machine operator.”
(Ord. 3470, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. 3542, passed 12-11-1975; Ord. MC-130,
passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-192, passed 7-22-1982)
§ 5.44.025 RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS OPERATORS UPON WHOSE PREMISES GAMES
MACHINES ARE FOUND.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person operating any business enterprise within
the city to have, in operation upon the premises of such person, any coin-
operated game machine, as defined in this chapter, which does not have affixed
thereto or posted in a conspicuous place nearby the tag or plate issued under
this chapter as required by §
5.44.080. This section shall not apply to a person owning, operating and
maintaining not more than two coin-operated games as an incidental business
used at a local place of business having the requisite business license
pursuant to Article I of this title, so long as the person actually owns,
operates and maintains the machine himself or herself.
   (B)   Any person operating any business enterprise within the city which has
in operation upon the premises of such person any coin-operated game machine,
as defined in this chapter, shall, at the time of renewal of the annual
business license for such business, provide to the Department of Finance and
Management Services a list of all game machines then on the premises, and the
names and addresses of the distributors of each such machine.
   (C)   Each such business operator shall notify the Department of Finance and
Management Services within ten days after any change is made in the number of
game machines on his or her premises for which a license is required, or after
any change in the name or address of the distributor of any such machine is
made. Any such person shall also notify the Department of Finance and
Management Services immediately if an untagged game machine is installed upon
his or her premises.
(Ord. MC-192, passed 7-22-1982; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.44.030 OPERATOR’S PERMIT - APPLICATION.
   (A)   An applicant for a game machine operator’s permit shall submit an
application to the Department of Finance and Management Services which
application shall be under penalty of perjury and upon a form supplied by the
Department of Finance and Management Services. Such application shall include
the true names, addresses and past criminal record, if any, of the applicant
and of all persons financially interested in the applicant’s business, and such
other information as may be deemed necessary by the Department of Finance and
Management Services and Chief of Police to determine whether such game machine
operator’s permit shall be granted. The application shall be accompanied by a
fully executed fingerprint card as to each such applicant, prepared under the
direction of the Chief of Police. An applicant shall pay a fee of $293 or such
fee as may be subsequently be set by resolution of the Mayor and City Council,
to cover the costs of the investigation required by §
5.44.040 and shall provide to the Chief of Police a money order payable to the
State Department of Justice in such amount as required by that agency to
process its report to the city based upon the fingerprint card provided. A $50
annual permit fee, or such fee as may subsequently be set by resolution of the
Mayor and City Council, shall be paid at the time of issuance of a permit,
which fee shall be prorated in the event that a permit is only for part of a
year. A permit may be renewed annually upon payment of the annual permit fee.
   (B)   PERSONS FINANCIALLY INTERESTED includes all persons who are officers
or directors of a corporation or share-holders holding more than 3% of the
shares thereof or persons who share in the profits of a non-corporate business
on the basis of gross or net revenue, but it does not include persons who
receive a portion of such gross or net revenue in return for the privilege of
permitting any other person to maintain such coin-operated game machine in
their place of business.
(Ord. 3470, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. 3542, passed 12-11-1975; Ord. MC-192,
passed 7-22-1982; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-
2024)
§ 5.44.040 INVESTIGATION.
   The Chief of Police shall carefully investigate the applicant and the facts
and circumstances concerning the application submitted to him or her pursuant
to §
5.44.030.
(Ord. 3470, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. 3542, passed 12-11-1975; Ord. MC-576,
passed 1-8-1987; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 5.44.050 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   The Chief of Police shall either approve or deny the issuance of
the permit to the applicant within 45 days of the date that the copy of the
application is submitted to him or her.
      (2)   The Chief of Police may deny a permit on any of the following
grounds:
         (a)   The operation will not comport with the peace, health, safety,
convenience and general welfare of the public;
         (b)   The application is not complete in that all requested
information is not supplied;
         (c)   The operation has been or is a public nuisance;
         (d)   The operation would be in violation of a city ordinance, state
law or federal law;
         (e)   The applicant has been found guilty, pled guilty and/or pled no
contest to a crime of moral turpitude;
         (f)   The applicant made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement
of fact in his or her application for a permit;
         (g)   The operation by the applicant will be carried on in a building,
structure and location which does not comply with and meet all of the health,
zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards of the laws of the state and
ordinances of the city;
      (h)   The applicant, his or her employee, agent or any person connected
or associated with the applicant as a partner, director, officer, stockholder,
associate or manager has allowed or permitted acts of sexual misconduct or lewd
conduct to be committed within prior or present business operations; and
      (i)   The applicant has within the year prior to the application date
willfully violated any provisions of this chapter or of the city licensing
provisions in Title 5.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall notify the applicant of the grant of a
permit, or of the denial of his or her application for a permit and the reasons
therefor. Service of such notice shall be made personally or by certified mail.
The notice shall include or be accompanied by a statement that the applicant
may request a hearing before the City Manager by filing with the City Clerk a
written request thereof within ten days after service upon him or her of the
notice of the denial of his or her application and that failure to do so will
constitute a waiver of his or her right to a hearing.
(Ord. 3470, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. 3542, passed 12-11-1975; Ord. MC-576,
passed 1-8-1987; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 5.44.060 HEARING UPON DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   Within ten days after service upon the applicant of a written notice of the
Police Chief’s denial of application for a permit, the applicant may file a
request for hearing in writing and signed by or on behalf of the applicant and
shall state his or her mailing address. It need not be verified or follow any
particular form. Failure to file such a request for a hearing shall constitute
a waiver of the applicant’s right to a hearing. No further notice other than
notice of the date and place of hearing need be served on the applicant.
Hearings granted under this section shall allow for the applicant to be
represented by counsel. The decision of the City Manager shall be final.
(Ord. 3470, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. 3542, passed 12-11-1975; Ord. MC-576,
passed 1-8-1987; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 5.44.070 GAME MACHINE TAG.
   Upon the issuance of any game machine operator’s permit, the applicant
therefor shall notify the Department of Finance and Management Services in
writing of the location of each coin-operated game machine, and in the event of
any change in the location of any machine, the permittee shall notify the
Department of Finance and Management Services of the change within ten days
including the address of the new location. At the time of issuing a business
license for any coin-operated game machine, the Department of Finance and
Management Services shall issue a tag or plate for each machine to be operated
by the game operator within the city limits, and such tags or plates shall be
given serial numbers consecutively in the order of their issuance. The tags and
plates shall be of wear-resistant materials.
(Ord. 3470, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. 3542, passed 12-11-1975; Ord. MC-192,
passed 7-22-1982; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-
2024)
§ 5.44.080 DISPLAY OF TAG OR PLATE.
   Every game machine operator shall, at all times, have affixed to or posted
conspicuously nearby each coin-operated game machine regulated under the terms
of this chapter the tag or plate issued under this chapter.
(Ord. 3470, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. 3542, passed 12-11-1975; Ord. MC-192,
passed 7-22-1982)
§ 5.44.085 DISPLAY OF INFORMATION CONCERNING DISTRIBUTOR.
   Every coin-operated game machine regulated under the terms of this chapter
shall, at all times, have affixed thereto in a conspicuous place thereon a tag,
label, owner-identification card or other identifying device listing the name,
current address and current telephone number of the distributor of such game
machine.
(Ord. MC-192, passed 7-22-1982)
§ 5.44.086 UNTAGGED MACHINES; NUISANCE; RECONNECTION FEES; ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
   (A)   Any machine not having the tags required by §
5.44.080 or the information required by §§
5.44.085 and
5.44.025(B) is declared a nuisance, and shall be subject to disconnection by
the city. A representative of the city shall be authorized to disconnect and
render said machine inoperative, following which the machine shall not be
reconnected or returned to operation within the city until the game machine
operator has paid to the Department of Finance and Management Services a
reconnect fee of $25, or such amount as subsequently set by resolution of the
Mayor and City Council, and has paid the business license fee applicable to
each machine under §
5.04.275. No person shall reconnect any machine which has been disconnected or
rendered inoperative by a representative of the city, without prior payment of
the reconnect fee to the city. No operator of the business upon whose premises
the machine is located shall permit such machine to be reconnected without
prior payment of the reconnect fee.
   (B)   The Department of Finance and Management Services shall assess the
person operating a business enterprise within the city upon whose premises one
or more untagged game machines are found for each such untagged game machine,
and for each game machine for which the information required under §§
5.44.085 and
5.44.025(B) has not been provided, an administrative fee in an amount computed
to cover the average cost of investigating, locating, disconnecting and
controlling untagged game machines and inadequately identified game machines.
This assessment shall be the average cost of such procedures, initially in an
amount of $50, or such amount as subsequently set by resolution of the Mayor
and City Council, for each such untagged game machine, and for each
inadequately identified machine, which administrative fee shall hereafter be
subject to periodic review and determination by the Mayor and City Council,
based upon the experienced costs of such control and regulation. Such
assessment shall be in addition to any reconnection fee imposed under §
5.44.086(A). No such fee shall be assessed as to any such untagged machine when
the business operator has notified the Department of Finance and Management
Services, under the provisions of §
5.44.025(B), in advance of the city’s representative appearing at the scene,
that such untagged machine was located upon the premises. Failure to pay any
assessment within ten days after notice of imposition thereof shall be an
omission justifying suspension of any business licensee’s business license
under the provisions of §
5.04.650. In the alternative, the Department of Finance and Management Services
may notify the person assessed that the business license for those premises
will not be renewed or reissued until all outstanding assessment fees have been
paid.
(Ord. MC-192, passed 7-22-1982; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.44.090 TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
   No game machine operator’s permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
assignable or transferable either voluntarily or by operation or law or
otherwise.
(Ord. 3470, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. 3542, passed 12-11-1975)
§ 5.44.100 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Department of Finance and Management Services shall have the power, for
good cause shown, to revoke or suspend any game machine operator’s permit
issued under this chapter. Failure to pay any reconnect fee provided for in §
5.44.086, or any conduct deleterious to the public health, welfare or morals,
and the existence of any of the reasons for a denial of a permit as set forth
in §
5.44.050, shall each constitute good cause for suspension or revocation. Any
such suspension or revocation shall be subject to appeal to the City Manager.
The City Manager shall provide a hearing of such appeal, with notice and
opportunity to present evidence, witnesses and arguments. The formal rules of
evidence shall not apply. The City Manager shall issue a written decision
explaining the basis of his or her decision on the appeal and a copy of the
written decision shall be mailed to the appellant. The suspension or revocation
shall be stayed pending the hearing.
(Ord. 3470, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. 3542, passed 12-11-1975; Ord. MC-192,
passed 7-22-1982; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-
2024)
§ 5.44.110 PERMIT IN ADDITION TO BUSINESS LICENSE OR OTHER PERMIT.
   The permit required under the terms of this chapter shall be in addition and
supplemental to any business license or any permit required by any ordinance of
the city.
(Ord. 3470, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. 3542, passed 12-11-1975)
§ 5.44.120 PROHIBITED DEVICES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit the licensing,
maintenance or operation of any coin-operated game machine which is forbidden
by any state or local law or regulation or to permit the operation of any coin-
operated game machine in such a manner as to constitute gambling or otherwise
be contrary to any such state law or regulation.
(Ord. 3470, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. 3542, passed 12-11-1975)
§ 5.44.130 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to perform the
duties imposed hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction
thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-192, passed 7-22-1982; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 5.48: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 5.52: ESCORT BUREAUS
Section
   
5.52.010   Definition
   
5.52.020   Permit - required - application
   
5.52.030   Permit - application - contents
   
5.52.040   Permit - granting
   
5.52.050   Separate permit for separate locations
   
5.52.060   Record of transactions to be kept
   
5.52.070   Suspension or revocation of permit
   
5.52.080   Applicability to employment agency
   
5.52.090   Employment of person under 21 prohibited
   
5.52.100   Furnishing escort to person under 18 - parental request required
   
5.52.110   Reserved
§ 5.52.010 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ESCORT BUREAU. Any business or agency which, for a fee, commission, hire,
reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish escorts or persons who, for
hire or reward, accompany others to or about social affairs, entertainments or
places of amusement, or who consort with others, for hire or reward, about any
place of public resort or within any private quarters. The requirements of this
chapter shall have no application and no effect upon and shall not be construed
as applying to any business, agency or person which provides escort services
for elderly persons pursuant to Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code, §§ 9400 et
seq., when such services are provided as part of a social welfare and health
program for such older persons.
(Ord. 2100, passed 3-6-1956; Ord. MC-575, passed 1-8-1987)
§ 5.52.020 PERMIT - REQUIRED - APPLICATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or carry on any escort
bureau without first securing a permit therefor from the Chief of Police. No
such permit shall be issued by the Chief of Police except upon the verified
application in writing of the individual to be in control of, and responsible
for, the operation and conduct of the business. The application shall be upon a
form furnished by the Police Department and shall set forth such information
concerning the applicant and the proposed business as the Chief of Police may
require, and must be accompanied by, a fee in the sum of $200, or such amount
as subsequently set by resolution of the Mayor and City Council. Each permit
issued shall expire on December 31 next following the date of issuance, and
each application for the annual renewal thereof shall be accompanied by a
renewal fee in the sum of $75, or such amount as subsequently set by resolution
of the Mayor and City Council. No permit under this section shall be issued to,
or in the name of, any organization, group, corporation, partnership or any
other entity than an individual person; but the business may be advertised and
carried on by the permittee under a fictitious name in the manner permitted by
law; provided such fictitious name is first approved by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 2100, passed 3-6-1956; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1487,
passed 4-18-2018)
§ 5.52.030 PERMIT - APPLICATION - CONTENTS.
   Each application must state the names and addresses of all escorts intended
to be employed by the applicant, and, if a permit is granted, the permittee
must notify the Chief of Police in writing, within 24 hours, of any change in
personnel. All such escorts shall be registered by the Police Department and
shall be photographed and fingerprinted. No escort shall be registered unless
there is furnished to the Chief of Police satisfactory evidence of the good
moral character of such escort. The registration of any escort may be canceled
for cause by the Chief of Police and thereafter no escort bureau shall employ,
engage or deal with such escort.
(Ord. 2100, passed 3-6-1956)
§ 5.52.040 PERMIT - GRANTING.
   If the Chief of Police, after investigation, finds that the applicant for
the permit is of good moral character and reputation, and that the business is
to be conducted at a suitable and proper place, and is not calculated or
intended to be operated as a subterfuge for the conduct of any unlawful or
immoral business or practice, then a permit shall be granted. Otherwise, the
application shall be denied.
(Ord. 2100, passed 3-6-1956)
§ 5.52.050 SEPARATE PERMIT FOR SEPARATE LOCATIONS.
   The permittee shall conduct the business only at the address shown on the
permit. Each additional place of business shall require a separate permit. Upon
the abandonment of the designated place of business, a change of address may be
granted by the Chief of Police upon the payment of a special fee of $25, and
the new address shall be endorsed upon the permit.
(Ord. 2100, passed 3-6-1956)
§ 5.52.060 RECORD OF TRANSACTIONS TO BE KEPT.
   A record shall be kept by each permittee showing every transaction whereby
any escort is employed, furnished or arranged for on behalf of any patron or
customer; the date and approximate hour of the transaction; the name, address
and telephone number of the patron or customer; the name of each escort
involved; and such other information as the Chief of Police may reasonably
require by rule or regulation. Such record shall be kept available and open to
the inspection of any police officer at any time during business hours and
shall be presented before the Chief of Police at any time upon written request
therefor.
(Ord. 2100, passed 3-6-1956)
§ 5.52.070 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Mayor and City Council shall have the power to suspend or revoke any
permit, or to deny a renewal after notice and an opportunity for a hearing has
been given to the permittee upon any of the following grounds:
   (A)   That the permittee has, in the course of the business, committed or
caused, permitted, encouraged or condoned the commission of any act in
violation of this section, or any lewd and immoral act, or any act of
prostitution; or
   (B)   That the business has been conducted, in whole or in part, as a
subterfuge to facilitate or to conceal the conduct of any unlawful business or
practice.
(Ord. 2100, passed 3-6-1956; Ord. MC-1487, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 5.52.080 APPLICABILITY TO EMPLOYMENT AGENCY.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall apply to the lawful business of any
employment agency licensed under the laws of this state.
(Ord. 2100, passed 3-6-1956)
§ 5.52.090 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSON UNDER 21 PROHIBITED.
   No permittee under this chapter shall employ, as an escort, any person under
21 years of age.
(Ord. 2100, passed 3-6-1956)
§ 5.52.100 FURNISHING ESCORT TO PERSON UNDER 18 - PARENTAL REQUEST REQUIRED.
   No permittee shall furnish any escort to or accept employment from any
patron, customer or person to be escorted who is under 18 years of age, except
at the special instance and request of the parent, guardian or other person in
lawful custody of the person upon whose behalf the escort service is engaged.
(Ord. 2100, passed 3-6-1956; Ord. MC-575, passed 1-8-1987)
§ 5.52.110 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 5.56: JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Section
   
5.56.010   Report of all property received required daily
   
5.56.020   Blanks to be furnished by Chief of Police
   
5.56.030   Blanks to be printed in triplicate
   
5.56.040   Signature, address and fingerprint required of persons leaving
property in pledge
   
5.56.050   Use of fictitious name unlawful
   
5.56.060   Reserved
   
5.56.070   License - conditions of issuance
   
5.56.080   License - application for permit
   
5.56.090   Possession of hides, bones or sacks used as containers for
fertilizer
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on pawnbrokers, see Cal. Financial Code, §§ 21000 through
21209
   For provisions on secondhand goods, see Cal. Business and Professions Code,
§§ 21500 through 21639
§ 5.56.010 REPORT OF ALL PROPERTY RECEIVED REQUIRED DAILY.
   (A)   Every junk dealer, secondhand dealer, pawnbroker, loan broker and
every proprietor, keeper or owner of any office or other place of business
where money is loaned on personal property for a compensation shall daily make
out and deliver to the Chief of Police every day before the hour of 12:00 p.m.,
on a blank form to be furnished him or her by the Chief of Police for that
purpose, a full, true and complete report of all the property and other
valuable goods, wares, merchandise or things received on deposit or purchased
during the preceding 24 consecutive hours, together with the time, meaning the
hour of the day, when received on deposit, in pawn or purchase, and a
description of the person or persons by whom left in pledge, or deposited or
from whom purchased, and also the true name, as nearly as the same is known to
the pawnbroker, junk dealer, secondhand dealer, loan broker or other person
heretofore designated. Each junk dealer shall make out and deliver on said form
in addition to the foregoing a description, motor number, body serial number,
color, make, model and year of any vehicle or part of a vehicle purchased by
the junk dealer. The report shall be written in the English language in a clear
and legible manner.
   (B)   All the property and other valuable goods, wares, merchandise received
on deposit or purchased should be kept intact in its original state by every
junk dealer, secondhand dealer, pawnbroker, loan broker and proprietor or owner
of any office or any other place of business where money is loaned on personal
property for compensation, for a period of 30 calendar days from the day of the
purchase, receipt or acquisition of the same, and shall be exhibited to the
Chief of Police upon demand being made by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 404, passed 12-7-1908; Ord. 2457, passed 8-24-1962)
§ 5.56.020 BLANKS TO BE FURNISHED BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police shall immediately, upon the adoption and publication of
the ordinance codified in this chapter, cause such number of blanks to be
printed as may be necessary for the purpose, and shall thereafter, from time to
time, cause such additional blanks to be printed as may be required, which
blanks shall be so printed and subdivided that it shall have spaces for writing
in the following matters: number of pawn ticket; amount loaned; amount
purchased; description of articles; name and residence of person pledging or
selling; description of person pledging or selling, showing true name as nearly
known, age, sex, complexion, color of mustache or beard or both, where both are
worn, style of dress, height and visible marks or scars; also the time when the
article or articles were received. The blank shall also bear a caption
providing blank spaces in which to fill in the date of the report, the name and
place of business of the person making the same and the hour of the day when
made. The Chief of Police shall further cause to be printed on the blanks in
some convenient place thereon a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
(Ord. 404, passed 12-7-1908)
§ 5.56.030 BLANKS TO BE PRINTED IN TRIPLICATE.
   The blanks shall be printed in triplicate in book form, and shall be
distributed by the Chief of Police to the persons from whom the reports are
required upon request and upon proof of the payment to the chief administrative
officer of the cost of the printing thereof; the Chief of Police upon the
receipt of the reports from any of the persons from whom the reports are
required shall file the same in his or her office, and the same shall be open
to inspection only to members of the City Police Department, or those
authorized by the Chief of Police, or to persons presenting a court order for
that purpose.
(Ord. 404, passed 12-7-1908; Ord. 1951, passed 7-22-1952)
§ 5.56.040 SIGNATURE, ADDRESS AND FINGERPRINT REQUIRED OF PERSONS LEAVING
PROPERTY IN PLEDGE.
   Every junk dealer, secondhand dealer, pawnbroker, loan broker or proprietor,
keeper or owner of any office or other place of business where money is loaned
on personal property for compensation, their agents and employees shall cause
the person or persons by whom the property is left in pledge, stored, deposited
or from whom purchased, to provide the following for inclusion on the report
required by §
5.56.010: his or her true signature, correct address and a plain fingerprint
impression of his or her right index finger, or if the right index finger is
missing, another of his or her fingers with a designation of which finger is
used.
(Ord. 404, passed 12-7-1908; Ord. 1613, passed 7-19-1938; Ord. MC-391, passed
7-11-1984)
§ 5.56.050 USE OF FICTITIOUS NAME UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person or persons to sign a fictitious name or
fictitious address in connection therewith.
(Ord. 404, passed 12-7-1908; Ord. 1613, passed 7-19-1938)
§ 5.56.060 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 5.56.070 LICENSE - CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE.
   No license to conduct, manage or carry on the business of a junk dealer or
collector within the city shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation
until a permit, in writing therefor, shall have been granted by the Mayor and
City Council as provided in §
5.56.080.
(Ord. 638, passed 8-22-16)
§ 5.56.080 LICENSE - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to manage, conduct or carry on the
business of a junk dealer or collector at any place within the city shall first
make application to the Mayor and City Council of the city for a permit to do
so; the application shall state the name of the person desiring to conduct,
manage or carry on such business and the place where the same is to be located.
Before any permit shall be granted to any person for a license to manage,
conduct or carry on the business of a junk dealer or collection at any place
within the city, the applicant for such permit shall file with the Mayor and
City Council the written consent to the granting thereof of all the owners and
tenants of property within 150 feet of the place where such business is to be
conducted.
(Ord. 638, passed 8-22-16)
§ 5.56.090 POSSESSION OF HIDES, BONES OR SACKS USED AS CONTAINERS FOR
FERTILIZER.
   It is unlawful for any junk dealer or collector to have in his or her
possession within the city, for a period in excess of one hour, any hides,
bones or sacks which have been previously used as containers for fertilizer.
(Ord. 638, passed 8-22-16)
CHAPTER 5.60: MOTOR BUSES
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1487, passed 4-18-2018)
CHAPTER 5.64: MOTOR FUEL SALES
Section
   
5.64.010   Signs to be posted
   
5.64.020   Size of sign
   
5.64.030   Compliance with city and state regulations
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on petroleum, see Cal. Business and Professions Code, §§
20700 et seq.
§ 5.64.010 SIGNS TO BE POSTED.
   Every person, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation offering for
sale or selling any gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel to the public from any
place of business in the city shall post or display a sign which is clearly
visible from any entrance to such place of business, and which indicates the
actual price per gallon, including all taxes, at which his or her grade of
gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel is currently being offered for sale or
sold.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3414, passed 4-4-1974)
§ 5.64.020 SIZE OF SIGN.
   When any such sign is portable, it shall not be more than 24 square feet or
less than six square feet in size and shall not exceed six feet in height.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3414, passed 4-4-1974)
§ 5.64.030 COMPLIANCE WITH CITY AND STATE REGULATIONS.
   Any sign posted or displayed pursuant to this chapter shall not be
inconsistent with the provisions of the Cal. Business and Professions Code,
Division 5, Chapter 14, Article 12 (§§ 13530 et seq.), and shall be in
compliance with the provisions of any city ordinance regulating size and
construction of signs.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3414, passed 4-4-1974)
CHAPTER 5.68: PERSONAL PROPERTY SALES
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1339, passed 11-16-2010)
CHAPTER 5.72: SATELLITE HORSE RACE WAGERING
Section
   
5.72.010   City receipt of allocated share
   
5.72.020   Tax and fee exemption of racing association
§ 5.72.010 CITY RECEIPT OF ALLOCATED SHARE.
   Pursuant to the authority of Cal. Business and Professions Code, § 19610.4,
the city elects to immediately receive its allocated share of the total
parimutuel satellite wagers made at the National Orange Show grounds. This
city’s share currently is set at 0.33% but shall be adjusted automatically as
the percentage is changed by the state law or regulation.
(Ord. MC-26, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. MC-618, passed 2-17-1988)
§ 5.72.020 TAX AND FEE EXEMPTION OF RACING ASSOCIATION.
   Any racing association which conducts a racing meeting at the National
Orange Show grounds shall be, with respect to any racing event conducted by
that racing association, exempt from levy or payment of any city license or
excise tax or fee, including, but not limited to, any admission, parking or
business tax or any tax or fee levied solely upon the racing association
conducting a racing meeting or satellite wagering or any patron.
(Ord. MC-26, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. MC-618, passed 2-17-1988)
CHAPTER 5.76: TAXICABS AND NON-EMERGENCY MEDICAL VEHICLES
Section
   
5.76.010   Short title
   
5.76.020   Definitions
   
5.76.030   Permit - required
   
5.76.040   Permit - petition for - requirements - filing fees
   
5.76.050   Permit - issuance - hearings
   
5.76.060   Permit - issuance - increase in service
   
5.76.070   Transfer of certificates
   
5.76.080   Notice of amendments
   
5.76.090   Dial-a-ride service
   
5.76.100   Only authorized service permitted
   
5.76.110   Revocation, suspension and cancellation of permits notice - hearing
   
5.76.120   License - fees - reports on charter vehicle hire
   
5.76.130   Display of permits
   
5.76.140   Insurance - non-emergency medical transportation vehicles
   
5.76.150   Insurance - taxicabs
   
5.76.160   Numbering of vehicles
   
5.76.170   Advertising
   
5.76.180   Availability of service
   
5.76.190   Cruising and loading
   
5.76.200   Rates - taxicab service
   
5.76.210   Medical transportation rates
   
5.76.220   Rates - minimum and maximum for limousine and chartered vehicle
service
   
5.76.230   Rates - established
   
5.76.240   Change in rates
   
5.76.250   Discrimination of rates prohibited
   
5.76.260   Rates to be displayed
   
5.76.270   Refusal to pay fare
   
5.76.280   Drivers
   
5.76.290   Investigation of drivers
   
5.76.300   Identification of vehicles
   
5.76.310   Identity light
   
5.76.320   Route-passenger limit in taxicabs
   
5.76.330   Equipment - inspection
   
5.76.340   Taximeter required - inspection - operation
   
5.76.350   Waiting time - on-scene time - ambulances
   
5.76.360   Receipt to be given upon request
   
5.76.370   Transaction records
   
5.76.380   Inspection of records
   
5.76.390   Taxi stands - application for - standing restricted
   
5.76.400   Taxi stands - issuance of permits
   
5.76.410   Taxi stands - permits subject to revocation
   
5.76.420   Taxi stands - authorized use only
   
5.76.430   Taxi stands - application fee - exemption
   
5.76.440   Taxi stand maintenance fee
   
5.76.450   Manner of giving notice
   
5.76.460   Reserved
   
5.76.470   Reserved
   
5.76.480   Reserved
   
5.76.490   Reserved
   
5.76.500   Medical transportation rates
   
5.76.510   Ambulance carrier requirements rates
   
5.76.520   Drivers and attendants of ambulances
   
5.76.530   Drivers of wheelchair passenger transportation vehicles or a
transportation van for the handicapped
   
5.76.540   Reserved
   
5.76.550   Reserved
   
5.76.555   Reserved
   
5.76.560   Reserved
   
5.76.570   Reserved
   
5.76.575   Application to city
   
5.76.580   Enforcement
   
5.76.590   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   For provisions authorizing local authorities to license and regulate
vehicles for hire, see Cal. Vehicle Code, §§ 16501, 21100 and 21112
   For provisions on privately owned and operated ambulances, see Cal. Vehicle
Code, §§ 2500 et seq.
   For provisions on the financial responsibility of commercial passenger
vehicles, see Cal. Vehicle Code, §§ 16500 et seq.
§ 5.76.010 SHORT TITLE.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Taxicab
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953)
§ 5.76.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVERTISE. To give public notice either by publication in a newspaper, or by
means of handbills, placards or other written public notice or call to the
public attention by any means whatsoever.
   AMBULANCE. Any privately owned emergency motor vehicle equipped or used for
the purpose of providing medical care and medical transportation, primarily
intended for and used for emergency transportation, but shall not mean a
funeral coach or hearse.
   CARRIER. Every person, firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture or
other form of business organization engaged in operating or causing to be
operated any vehicle required by the provisions of this chapter of the city, as
amended, to be covered by a permit.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino, California.
   COMPENSATION. Any money, thing of value, payment, consideration, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity or profit paid, accepted or received for transportation
of a person or persons or for services rendered, whether paid upon
solicitation, demand or contract or voluntarily, or intended as a gratuity or
donation.
   DIALYSIS TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE. Any privately owned motor vehicle which is
equipped and used exclusively for the purpose of medical transportation of
passengers requiring treatment for end stage renal disease at any licensed
hemodialysis unit.
   DISABLED TRANSPORTATION VAN. A vehicle equipped as a wheelchair
transportation vehicle used for the public transportation of disabled persons
over the streets of the city but not over defined routes pursuant to an
agreement with the city.
   DRIVER. Every person driving, operating or in charge of any vehicle
regulated by this chapter.
   DRIVER’S PERMIT. The permit issued by the Chief of Police to any person
operating or driving any vehicle regulated by this chapter.
   MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE. Any vehicle included in the definition of an
ambulance, a dialysis transportation vehicle or a wheelchair passenger
transportation vehicle, which is used for medical transportation.
   NON-EMERGENCY MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION. The transportation for hire, except by
taxicab or ambulance, of any passengers who may be wounded, sick, injured, ill,
incapacitated, infirm, an expectant mother or dead person, to or from any
office, facility or institution which regularly offers any type of non-
emergency medical care or service.
   PERSON. Persons, firms, corporations, associations, syndicates, joint
ventures, joint stock companies, partnerships and any other form of business
organization.
   STREET. Every public street, road, alley, place, way or highway in the city.
   TAXI STAND. A place on a public street designated by the city for the use,
while awaiting employment, of a vehicle covered by this chapter.
   TAXICAB. Every vehicle used for the public transportation of passengers over
the streets of the city, but not over defined routes, irrespective of whether
such operations extend beyond the city, whether or not compensation is paid for
such transportation and whether or not the charge to patrons is determined and
indicated by the mechanical calculation of a taximeter, as defined below.
   TAXIMETER. A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of
a taxicab is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled, or for
waiting time, or both, and upon which such charge is plainly registered by
means of figures, indicating dollars and cents.
   TEMPORARY DRIVER’S PERMIT. A permit issued by the Chief of Police to any
person to temporarily operate or drive any vehicle regulated by this chapter.
   WHEELCHAIR PASSENGER TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE. Any privately owned motor
vehicle equipped or used for the purpose of medical transportation of
passengers confined to a wheelchair who are unable to be transported in a
normal manner by taxicab or private automobile, but do not require the use of a
stretcher, litter or ambulance cot. The use of a stretcher, litter or ambulance
cot or other device for the transportation of passengers in a reclining
position is prohibited in a WHEELCHAIR PASSENGER TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3486, passed 3-19-1975; Ord. 3584, passed 7-
6-1976; Ord. 3943, passed 6-3-1980; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018)
Editor’s note:
   Definition 21 of the prior code was repealed by Ord. MC-943, passed 6-6-
1995.
§ 5.76.030 PERMIT - REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive, operate or cause to be operated, or
to employ, permit or allow another to drive, operate or cause to be operated,
any taxicab or non-emergency medical transportation vehicle over any street of
this city, regardless of whether such operation extends beyond the boundary
limits of the city, or to advertise for, solicit, induce, persuade, invite or
procure such transportation of passengers, or sick or injured persons for non-
emergency transportation without first obtaining a permit from the city,
subject to the exceptions set forth in the following divisions (A) through (I)
below:
   (A)   A vehicle or medical transportation vehicle which is lawfully
transporting a passenger or a patient from a point outside the city to a
destination within the city, or en route to a destination outside the city, is
excepted; provided that no such vehicle shall solicit or accept a passenger or
patient from within the city for transportation to any destination whatsoever
without such permit;
   (B)   Any private medical transportation vehicle accepting and transporting
a patient within the city when such private medical transportation vehicle has
been requested or summoned by any police, fire or civil defense authority or
has been informed by the person requesting such transportation that no
permittee hereunder is willing or able to render such transportation and the
City Police Department has been notified that such transportation will be made
is excepted; provided that the city may revoke the permit of any permittee
refusing such transportation unless the following conditions exist:
      (1)   The permittee has notified the city in writing of the time and date
of each such refusal and the reasons therefor on or before the tenth day of the
following month; and
      (2)   The city finds that the permittee refusing service was not able by
reason of unavailability of equipment and personnel to render such service. In
making this finding, the city may require the permittee to furnish any further
information reasonably necessary for such determination.
   (C)   A vehicle being operated pursuant to franchise issued by the authority
of the State Public Utilities Commission or Interstate Commerce Commission is
excepted;
   (D)   A vehicle being operated for the purpose of transporting bona fide
pupils attending an institution of learning between their homes and such
institution is excepted;
   (E)   A vehicle being operated under what is commonly referred to as a “ride
share” plan or arrangement, as where a person en route from his or her place of
residence to his or her place of business, or vice versa, transports another
person living and working in the same general vicinity upon payment of a sum
estimated to cover the actual or approximate cost of operation of the vehicle
is excepted;
   (F)   A vehicle rented or leased for self-operation by a person using such
vehicle under a plan commonly known as “U-Drive,” unless it is used by such
person to transport other persons for compensation, is excepted;
   (G)   Any ambulance or medical transport vehicle maintained, owned or
operated by any firm, corporation, copartnership or individual engaged in any
business other than the ambulance business in this city, which ambulance or
medical transport vehicle is maintained, owned or operated exclusively or
primarily for the use and benefit of officers, servants or employees of such
firm, corporation, co-partnership or individual is excepted;
   (H)   Any disabled transportation van operated pursuant to an agreement with
the city subject to the terms, covenants and conditions of such agreement and
any applicable rules and regulations adopted by the Mayor and City Council;
provided that such rules and regulations may be modified or amended by the
Mayor and City Council at any time; and
   (I)   One handicapped transportation van for the handicapped operation
pursuant to an agreement with the city subject to the terms, covenants and
conditions of such agreement and any applicable rules and regulations adopted
by the Bureau of Franchises; provided that such rules and regulations may be
modified or amended by the Mayor and City Council at any time.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2979, passed 3-18-1969; Ord. 3486, passed 3-
19-1975; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-943, passed 6-6-1995; Ord. MC-
947, passed 7-12-1995; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 5.76.040 PERMIT - PETITION FOR - REQUIREMENTS - FILING FEES.
   (A)   Any person desiring a permit to operate vehicles regulated by this
chapter shall file a petition therefor with the Department of Finance and
Management Services. Such petition shall be verified by oath of the applicant,
if a natural person; or by oath of an officer or partner of the applicant, if
the applicant is a corporation, partnership, association or unincorporated
company, and which petition shall set forth the name, age and address of the
petitioner, if a natural person, or if a corporation, its name, date and place
of incorporation, address of its principal place of business and the names of
all its officers, together with their respective residence addresses; or if a
partnership, association or unincorporated company, then the names of the
partners or persons comprising the partnership, association or company,
together with their respective ages and residence addresses. The petition shall
also state the trade name or style, if any, under which the applicant proposes
to operate; full information pertaining to the extent, character and nature of
the proposed operation; and the manner in which such proposed operations are to
be conducted; the type, model, capacity and condition of the vehicles proposed
to be operated; a full statement of the petitioner’s assets and liabilities;
and such other or additional information as the Department of Finance and
Management Services may require.
   (B)   The Department of Finance and Management Services shall, upon receipt
of such petition, make full and complete inquiry into the facts set forth
therein, hold a hearing thereon upon such notice to interested persons as it
shall prescribe and shall either grant or deny a permit upon the proposed
terms, or upon terms other than those proposed. Such permit shall be for a
specified number of vehicles which shall only be increased by authority of the
Director of Finance and Management Services. Such permit may, at the pleasure
of the city, be for a prescribed period or for an indefinite period; provided
that in either event, the permit shall be subject to revocation or suspension,
as provided in this chapter or other ordinances of the city. When issued, such
permit shall constitute evidence of compliance with the terms of this chapter,
and shall authorize the permittee to operate vehicles under the conditions
therein specified; subject, however, to the requirements, obligations and
limitations imposed by other applicable laws, ordinances and shall become
effective only upon payment of the fees required by the provisions of all
ordinances or resolutions applicable thereto.
   (C)   At or before the time the petition is filed with the Department of
Finance and Management Services, the petitioner shall pay to the Department of
Finance and Management Services a filing fee of $500, plus $10 for each vehicle
proposed to be covered by the permit, or such amount as may subsequently be set
by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3022, passed 10-21-1969; Ord. MC-1480, passed
4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.050 PERMIT - ISSUANCE - HEARINGS.
   No permit shall be granted to any carrier, as defined in §
5.76.020, except after a hearing thereon, conducted under and in accordance
with such rules and regulations as may, from time to time, be prescribed
therefor by the Mayor and City Council and until the Department of Finance and
Management Services shall have determined that the public convenience and
necessity require the operation proposed by the applicant for such permit. The
Department of Finance and Management Services, in determining whether or not
such facts exist, shall take into consideration the public demand for such
service; the adequacy or inadequacy of service being rendered by other
carriers; the effect of such service upon traffic; the financial responsibility
of the applicant; the amount of wages to be paid to employees; the character of
equipment proposed to be furnished; and any and all other facts which the
Department of Finance and Management Services may deem relevant. Before
granting any such permit, the Department of Finance and Management Services
shall require its authorized officer to present an oral or written report which
shall include his or her opinion as to the existence of public convenience and
necessity for the operation proposed by the applicant. However, the burden of
establishing the existence of public convenience and necessity shall always be
borne by the applicant, and no permit shall be issued unless there has been an
affirmative showing of the existence of such public convenience and necessity
by such applicant. The foregoing provisions and requirements shall also apply
where an increase in service is requested.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3022, passed 10-21-1969; Ord. MC-1480, passed
4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.060 PERMIT - ISSUANCE - INCREASE IN SERVICE.
   (A)   If the Department of Finance and Management Services finds that
further service in the nature of that proposed in the city is required by the
public convenience and necessity, then each holder of a certificate to operate
taxi and/or non-emergency medical transportation vehicles in said class shall
be notified as to the total increase in the number of such vehicles for which
the convenience and necessity is found. The Department of Finance and
Management Services shall then determine, subject to approval, reversal or
modification thereof by the City Manager, whether each such holder shall have
the right to increase the number of such vehicles in the same proportions that
the total increase bears to the number of such vehicles theretofore operated by
the holder; or whether an applicant shall be granted a permit to provide such
service in accordance with the procedures herein provided upon the condition
that the applicant meets all the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   In making the above findings and determinations, the Department of
Finance and Management Services shall be governed and limited by the following
standards: not more than one taxicab shall be permitted for each 2,500
residents of the city, or major portion thereof.
   (C)   The number of residents of the city shall be determined by the current
population estimate of the State Department of Finance and Management Services.
   (D)   The above limitation of not more than one vehicle for the indicated
number of residents means one operating vehicle during each hour of any day.
(Ord. MC-119, passed 11-16-1981; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1480,
passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.070 TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   No permit or certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be
sold, transferred, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise conveyed without the
approval of the Department of Finance and Management Services, and the sale,
assignment, mortgaging, transfer or otherwise conveying any such certificate
without the approval of the Department of Finance and Management Services first
had and obtained shall revoke the certificate. Any successor, transferee or
assignee shall comply with each requirement and condition of the permit or
certificate.
   (B)   Any aggrieved and interested party may appeal to the City Manager from
a decision of the Department of Finance and Management Services made pursuant
to this section, by filing a written notice of appeal with the Department of
Finance and Management Services within ten days of the challenged decision. The
City Manager shall provide a hearing of such appeal, with notice and
opportunity to present evidence, witnesses and arguments. The formal rules of
evidence shall not apply. The City Manager shall issue a written decision
explaining the basis of his or her decision on the appeal and a copy of the
written decision shall be mailed to the appellant.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3022, passed 10-21-1969; Ord. MC-1017, passed
2-4-1998; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.080 NOTICE OF AMENDMENTS.
   Notice of current amendments to this chapter and of scheduled hearings under
§
5.76.050 shall be given to applicants for permits or certificates and to firms
and persons to whom operating permits and certificates have been issued;
provided that failure to give such notice shall not invalidate any decision
made, or permit or certificate issued, pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3022, passed 10-21-1969)
§ 5.76.090 DIAL-A-RIDE SERVICE.
   (A)   A person holding a taxicab permit under the provisions of this chapter
and having an agreement with the city authorizing a dial-a-ride service may
drive, operate or cause to be driven or operated authorized vehicles on the
public streets, subject to the terms, covenants and conditions of said
agreement, this chapter and any applicable rules and regulations adopted by the
Bureau of Franchises. The Bureau or its Chairperson shall issue a dial-a-ride
permit upon execution of the agreement.
   (B)   The Bureau may adopt rules and regulations governing the operation of
such service after giving notice and an opportunity to be heard to all persons,
firms, corporations and associations having operating permits or certificates
issued under this chapter and other interested persons; provided that such
rules and regulations shall not conflict with the provisions of the agreement
and may be reversed or modified by the Mayor and City Council at any time
during the term of the agreement.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3585, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 5.76.100 ONLY AUTHORIZED SERVICE PERMITTED.
   It is unlawful for any carrier granted a permit under this chapter to
conduct any operation or give any service other than the service authorized by
its permit granted by the city.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 5.76.110 REVOCATION, SUSPENSION AND CANCELLATION OF PERMITS NOTICE - HEARING.
   (A)   The Department of Finance and Management Services shall have the power
to suspend or revoke any or all of the carrier permits granted under the
provisions of this chapter when it has determined that any of the provisions
hereof have been violated, or that any holder of such a permit has failed to
comply with the terms of such permit or the rules and regulations of the city
pertaining to the operation, character and quality of the service of any such
vehicles. Before revocation of such permit, the carrier shall be entitled to a
hearing thereon before the Department of Finance and Management Services and
shall be notified thereof.
   (B)   Notice of hearing on such proposed suspension or revocation shall be
in writing and shall be served at least five days prior to the date of the
hearing thereon, such service to be upon the holder of such permit, or its
manager, or agent, and which notice shall state the grounds of complaint
against the holder of such permit and shall also state the time when and the
place where such hearing will be held. In the event the holder of such permit
cannot be found, or service of such notice cannot be made upon it in the manner
herein provided, then a copy of such notice shall be mailed, postage fully
prepaid, addressed to such carrier at its last known address, at least five
days prior to the date of such hearing.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.120 LICENSE - FEES - REPORTS ON CHARTER VEHICLE HIRE.
   (A)   Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall entitle the holder
thereof to obtain a license to engage in the business described in the permit
upon payment of the fees required by the city’s license ordinance, provided the
holder of such permit complies with all other applicable provisions of law or
city ordinances.
   (B)   Prior to issuance of any such license, the applicant therefor shall
obtain from the Bureau a certificate showing that a permit is in effect
authorizing the proposed service by the applicant, that issuance as required by
ordinance is in effect and describing the vehicles so authorized to be used.
The applicant shall file the certificate so issued by the Bureau with the
license tax collector at the time the license is issued. The license tax
collector shall retain such certificate so filed and shall indicate thereon the
serial number of the license issued pursuant thereto.
   (C)   Any permittee holding a valid and effective permit for operation of a
charter vehicle shall be entitled, provided all other applicable laws and
ordinances are complied with, to obtain a license to engage in the business
thereby permitted and shall, likewise, be entitled to receive a certificate
from the Bureau that such permit or permits are in effect. Each such licensee
shall, not later than the tenth day of each month, file with the Bureau a
verified report covering the operation of charter vehicles by such licensee for
the previous calendar month. Such report shall show the date; the place of
origin; the ultimate destination; the name of the party employing the vehicle;
the type, make and state license number of the vehicle; and such other data as
may be required by the Bureau upon forms provided by it. A copy of each report
shall be filed with the city’s license tax collector and shall be accompanied
by payment of the amount due.
   (D)   In the event any person required to file such monthly report fails to
do so, or in the event such reports are found not to be complete, the Bureau
may immediately terminate the permits held by such person under this chapter.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953)
§ 5.76.130 DISPLAY OF PERMITS.
   (A)   There shall be displayed upon each vehicle operated pursuant to the
terms of this chapter a numbered permit, for the current year, to be issued by
the city upon payment of the required license fee. Each such permit shall be
securely attached on the rear of any vehicle and shall be plainly visible at
all times.
   (B)   In the event of loss or destruction of any such permit, a renewal
permit shall be secured by payment to the Department of Finance and Management
Services of a fee of $2 for each such permit, or such fee as shall be
subsequently set by resolution of the Mayor and City Council, but no such
renewal permit shall be issued except upon application to the Department of
Finance and Management Services, and establishing by clear and satisfactory
proof that the permit being replaced has been lost or destroyed.
   (C)   A current and complete description of each vehicle on which a permit
is attached or may be attached and displayed shall be filed on an approved form
with the Department of Finance and Management Services.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3002, passed 7-15-1969; Ord. MC-1480, passed
4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.140 INSURANCE - NON-EMERGENCY MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES.
   No carrier which operates non-emergency medical transportation vehicles,
wheelchair passenger transportation vehicles, disabled transportation van or
dialysis transportation vehicles shall operate or permit to be operated any
vehicle under the provisions of this chapter, unless and until such vehicle is
covered by the insurance requirements set forth below, and the policy of such
insurance or a certificate thereof, in an insurance company approved by the
city, has been filed with the Department of Finance and Management Services.
Such policy or certificate shall set forth with particularity the make, number
and other identifying data of each vehicle covered by such policy, together
with the expiration date of such policy, and any other information required by
the Department of Finance and Management Services. For non-emergency medical
transportation vehicles, wheelchair passenger transportation vehicles, disabled
transportation vans or dialysis transportation vehicles, $2,000,000 combined
single incident public liability and property damage insurance is required.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3943, passed 6-3-1980; Ord. MC-424, passed
12-18-1984; Ord. MC-943, passed 6-6-1995; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018; Ord.
MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.150 INSURANCE - TAXICABS.
   Each taxicab carrier and owner of a taxicab or vehicle used in the
transportation of passengers for hire shall maintain, whenever he or she may be
engaged in conducting such operations, ability to respond in damages resulting
from the ownership or operation of the taxicab or vehicle and arising by reason
of personal injury to, or death of, any one person, of at least $100,000 and,
subject to the limit of $100,000 for each person injured or killed, of at least
$300,000 for such injury to, or the death of, two or more persons in any one
accident, and for damages to property of at least $50,000 resulting from any
one accident. The minimum limits of the foregoing ability to respond in damages
shall be maintained or increased to conform with Cal. Vehicle Code, § 16500.
Ability to respond in damages may be maintained by either of the alternatives
set forth in said § 16500.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3002, passed 7-15-1969; Ord. MC-16, passed
12-9-1980)
§ 5.76.160 NUMBERING OF VEHICLES.
   Each vehicle operated pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be
numbered. Such number shall be painted upon the body of the vehicle in numerals
not less than four inches nor more than six inches in height in a position or
positions approved by the Department of Finance and Management Services. A city
permit shall be attached to each vehicle.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2733, passed 4-5-1966; Ord. MC-1480, passed
4-18-2018)
§ 5.76.170 ADVERTISING.
   No advertising or advertising device shall be placed on or in any vehicle
operated under this chapter without the approval of the Department of Finance
and Management Services.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2078, passed 11-8-1955; Ord. MC-1480, passed
4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.180 AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE.
   Taxicab service shall be available, at all times, by telephone call, by
engagement of the taxicab when standing at a regularly assigned stand or when
hailed from the street or curb. It is unlawful for any carrier or driver of a
taxicab to refuse or neglect to transport any orderly person or persons upon
request anywhere in the city when a taxicab or such carrier is standing in a
regularly assigned taxi stand, and such service shall be rendered immediately
upon request.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953)
§ 5.76.190 CRUISING AND LOADING.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any driver of any vehicle licensed under this
chapter, while driving such vehicle, to cruise, loiter or stop on a public
street for the purpose of soliciting passengers or seeking a place in a taxi
stand which is already occupied.
   (B)   It shall be lawful, however, for such vehicle while proceeding to a
regularly assigned taxi stand, regularly established call station or to the
carrier’s principal place of business, to accept employment when hailed from
the street or curb; provided that it is unlawful for such driver to accept
passengers at any of the following places:
      (1)   In any marked or unmarked crosswalk;
      (2)   At any regularly established bus stop;
      (3)   At any place in a street except alongside a curb; and
      (4)   Alongside any curb opposite a regularly established and marked
traffic safety zone.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953)
§ 5.76.200 RATES - TAXICAB SERVICE.
   The rates or fares to be charged the public for taxicab service shall not be
more than the maximum rates established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3406, passed 3-4-1974; Ord. 3412, passed 3-
19-1974; Ord. 3585, passed 7-6-11976; Ord. 3750, passed 8-21-1978; Ord. MC-497,
passed 2-3-1986; Ord. MC-659, passed 5-15-1989; Ord. MC-1172, passed 5-3-2004;
Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 5.76.210 MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION RATES.
   The rates which shall be charged the public by non-emergency medical
transportation carriers shall be such as are prescribed in the carrier’s
permit, and shall not exceed the maximum rates sets forth in the schedule for
such charges fixed by resolution adopted by the Mayor and City Council. All
rate changes subsequently adopted shall be adopted only after a duly noticed
public hearing is held relating thereto.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3585, passed 7-6-11976; Ord. MC-1480, passed
4-18-2018)
§ 5.76.220 RATES - MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM FOR LIMOUSINE AND CHARTERED VEHICLE
SERVICE.
   (A)   The rates or fares to be charged the public for chauffeured limousine
and charted vehicle service shall be in accordance with the carrier’s permit
and as prescribed by the Bureau and the Mayor and City Council, and shall be
not less than the minimum nor more than the maximum rates which are fixed in
this section.
   (B)   The minimum rate shall be $5 per hour or $0.40 per mile, whichever is
the greater, and hourly rate shall be computed in fractions of one-half hour.
The minimum charge for chauffeured limousine service shall be the rate for the
one-half hour.
   (C)   The maximum rate shall be $7 per hour or $0.60 per mile, whichever is
the greater, and the hourly rate shall be computed in fraction of one-half
hour.
   (D)   The foregoing rates shall apply to time or mileage, whichever is the
greater, upon departure from the carrier’s principal place of business in the
city and until return thereto.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3022, passed 10-21-1969)
§ 5.76.230 RATES - ESTABLISHED.
   No rate or fare shall be placed in effect, charged, demanded or collected by
any carrier for the transportation of passengers by vehicle for its services as
regulated by this chapter until the Mayor and City Council, after a hearing
upon its own motion, or upon application, or complaint, has found and
determined the rate to be just, reasonable and non-discriminatory, nor in any
way in violation of any provisions herein contained or any provisions of law.
In establishing and authorizing such rates or fees, the city shall take into
account, and give due and reasonable consideration to the cost of all
comparable transportation services performed by all persons, firms or
corporations engaged in such transportation services for compensation in the
city, whether by virtue of any franchise granted by the Department of Finance
and Management Services or otherwise, including length of haul, any additional
transportation service performed or of any accessory service, and to value of
the facilities reasonably necessary to perform such transportation service.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2078, passed 11-8-1955; Ord. MC-943, passed
6-6-1995; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.240 CHANGE IN RATES.
   The Bureau shall have power, upon a hearing, upon its own motion or upon
application, or complaint, to investigate a single rate or fare, or the entire
schedule of fares in effect, charged, demanded or collected for the
transportation services by vehicles covered by this chapter, and with the
approval of the Mayor and City Council, establish a new rate, fare or schedule
of fares in lieu thereof.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2078, passed 11-8-1955)
§ 5.76.250 DISCRIMINATION OF RATES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any carrier, or any agent or employee thereof, or any
driver or operator of any vehicle regulated by this chapter, to charge,
collect, demand, receive, arrange, solicit or bargain for any amount of
compensation in excess of, or less than, the rates or fares established and
authorized by the city.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 5.76.260 RATES TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Every vehicle used or operated under this chapter shall, at all times, have
displayed therein, in a location and manner approved by the Department of
Finance and Management Services, the rates to be charged for such service, and
which rates shall always be visible.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2078, passed 11-8-1955; Ord. MC-1480, passed
4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.270 REFUSAL TO PAY FARE.
   It is unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the authorized fare of any of
the vehicles mentioned in this chapter after having employed the same, and it
is unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle, defined in §
5.76.020, with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired or engaged of
the value of such service.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953)
§ 5.76.280 DRIVERS.
   (A)   Vehicles covered by this chapter shall be operated only by the
carrier, if a person, or by a person employed by the carrier, or by a person
authorized by lease, contract or other arrangement with a carrier to operate a
vehicle under such carrier’s permit; each such authorized person shall be
subject to and comply with all the applicable provisions of this chapter, and
no carrier shall impose upon such person any contractual terms or conditions
inconsistent with those set forth in this chapter. If the applicant is not an
employee, the proposed arrangement, contract or lease under which such
authority is to be exercised shall be submitted in writing to the Department of
Finance and Management Services. The Director of Finance and Management
Services shall, after he or she has conducted, or caused to be conducted, such
review and investigation as he or she deems necessary, approve or reject the
proposed arrangement, contract or lease and shall communicate his or her
decision to the applicant within ten days after the proposed arrangement,
contract or lease has been submitted. If the Director of Finance and Management
Services fails to communicate an adverse decision to the applicant within ten
days after the proposed arrangement, contract or lease has been submitted, it
shall be deemed rejected. If the Director of Finance and Management Services
rejects the proposed arrangement, contract or lease, the applicant may request,
in writing, a hearing before the City Manager. The request for a hearing shall
be submitted to the City Clerk within five days after the decision of the
Director of Finance and Management Services has been communicated to the
applicant. The Department of Finance and Management Services shall promptly
notify the applicant of the time and place of the hearing which shall not be
more than 30 days after the request for hearing has been submitted. The hearing
shall be conducted informally pursuant to the provisions of §
5.76.070(B). The decision of the City Manager shall be final. No arrangement,
contract or lease shall be approved if any of the terms thereof are not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Such approval may be withdrawn by the City Manager by the mailing of a
ten-day notice of intention to the carrier and the driver, subject to the right
to request a hearing under the same procedures and standards for the original
approval. This provision permitting the withdrawal of approval shall be deemed
to be a part of each such arrangement, contract or lease when so approved and
neither the carrier nor the driver shall have any legal recourse or right of
action arising out of such withdrawal of approval.
   (C)   A person authorized to operate under carrier’s permit by arrangement,
contract or lease shall be deemed to be an independent contractor and shall
obtain a city business license.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2154, passed 1-22-1957; Ord. 3585, passed 7-
6-1976; Ord. 3877, passed 11-7-1979; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-
1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.290 INVESTIGATION OF DRIVERS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation concerning the
background, conduct, behavior and character of any applicant to drive a vehicle
under a carrier’s permit or of any driver while operating a vehicle under a
carrier’s permit in order to present facts or information to aid the Director
of Finance and Management Services in determining whether the prospective or
continued operation of a vehicle by a driver would be detrimental to the
health, safety, peace, general welfare or convenience of the public.
   (B)   The investigation report shall be forwarded to the Director of Finance
and Management Services, who may utilize the report to determine whether to
approve or reject an arrangement, contract or lease relating to an applicant or
whether such approval should be withdrawn pursuant to §
5.76.280.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3585, passed 7-6-1976; Ord. 3877, passed 11-
7-1979; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.300 IDENTIFICATION OF VEHICLES.
   No permit shall be granted to any carrier to operate any vehicle covered by
this chapter whose color scheme, name, trade name, monogram or insignia shall
be in conflict with, or in imitation of, any color scheme, name, trade name,
monogram or insignia used by any other carrier, as defined in §
5.76.020, and which shall be of such character and nature as to be misleading
or deceptive to the public.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953)
§ 5.76.310 IDENTITY LIGHTS.
   Every taxicab shall be equipped with an identity light attached to the top
of such taxicab. The identity light shall be constructed in one unit consisting
of an illuminated plate or cylinder upon which is printed the words “for hire,”
or as approved by the Department of Finance and Management Services. The
overall dimensions of such identity light shall not exceed six inches in height
by 20 inches in length. The lights of the identity light unit shall be operated
automatically or manually to illuminate the identity light when the taximeter
is not in operation, indicating the cab is vacant and for hire, and to
extinguish the identity light when the taximeter is in operation. It is
unlawful to drive or operate any taxicab with such identity light illuminated
while carrying passengers for compensation, and it is unlawful to drive,
operate or be in charge of any taxicab unless such identity light is
illuminated when such taxicab is for hire. None of the foregoing provisions
requiring the identity light to be illuminated shall apply during daylight
hours.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2154, passed 1-22-1957; Ord. MC-1480, passed
4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.320 ROUTE-PASSENGER LIMIT IN TAXICABS.
   (A)   Every driver of a taxicab who is engaged to carry passengers shall
take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely and
expeditiously to their destinations unless otherwise directed by the hirer.
   (B)   When a taxicab is engaged, the person or persons engaging such taxicab
shall have the exclusive right to the full and complete use of the passenger
compartment, and it is unlawful for the carrier or driver of the taxicab to
solicit, or carry additional passengers therein except with the express consent
of each of said persons; provided, however, that where the Department of
Finance and Management Services finds that public necessity requires the
grouping of passengers in such taxicabs, the Department of Finance and
Management Services may issue a special written permit, which permits shall
specifically set forth the rules and regulations under which such passenger
grouping is permitted. It is unlawful for any driver or carrier to operate or
permit to be operated any taxicab in violation of any of the rules and
regulations set forth in such special permits.
   (C)   The number of adult passengers which may be carried in any vehicle
covered by this chapter shall be limited to the seating capacity of such
vehicle as specified by the manufacturer. The number of passengers consisting
of children attending schools below the level of junior high schools, which may
be carried in any vehicle covered by this chapter shall be limited to the adult
seating capacity of such vehicle, as specified by the manufacturer, plus one.
No person shall be carried in such vehicle who is required to share in any way
the seating space occupied by another, nor shall any person be carried who is
not provided a seat.
   (D)   The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above shall not apply to dial-
a-ride taxicab.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3022, passed 10-21-1969; Ord. 3585, passed 7-
6-1976; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.330 EQUIPMENT - INSPECTION.
   All vehicles operated by any carrier, as defined in §
5.76.020, shall, before being placed in service, be approved by the Department
of Finance and Management Services. All such vehicles shall be of a design and
type of construction as shall comply with orders and regulations pertaining to
such equipment adopted, from time to time, by the Department of Finance and
Management Services. Such vehicles shall, at all times, be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition and in a good state of repair, and shall be subject to
inspection, at all times, by the Department of Finance and Management Services,
or its representative. Any vehicle which becomes unsafe, unclean or
unserviceable or mechanically defective shall be retired from service upon
order of the Department of Finance and Management Services, and no vehicle
which has been so retired shall be again operated in such service except with
approval of the Department of Finance and Management Services.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.340 TAXIMETER REQUIRED - INSPECTION - OPERATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any carrier to operate, or cause to be operated,
any taxicab in the city unless and until such taxicab is equipped with a
taximeter of a type and design approved by the Department of Finance and
Management Services, and it shall be the duty of the carrier operating such
taxicab, and also the driver thereof, to keep such meter operating at all times
within such standard of accuracy as may be prescribed by the Department of
Finance and Management Services. No passenger shall be carried in any such cab
unless the taximeter is in operation. This provision shall apply regardless of
whether the taxicab is engaged for a trip entirely within the boundaries of the
city or partially outside thereof, and such meter shall be kept operating
continuously during the entire time that it is engaged in the transportation of
passengers for compensation; provided that when the point of destination is
outside the boundaries of the city from a point within the boundaries, the rate
charged for the trip outside of the boundaries may be a flat rate in accordance
with a schedule approved by the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   The taximeter shall be placed in each taxicab so that the reading dial
showing the amount to be charged shall be well lighted and readily discernible
to a passenger riding in any such taxicab.
   (C)   Every taximeter used in the operation of taxicabs shall be subject to
inspection at any time by the Department of Finance and Management Services, or
any of its representatives. Upon discovery or notice from the Department of
Finance and Management Services of any inaccuracy of such taximeter, the
operator thereof shall remove, or cause to be removed, from service any vehicle
equipped with the taximeter until such taximeter has been repaired and
accurately adjusted or replaced with one approved by the Department of Finance
and Management Services.
   (D)   The carrier shall cause each taximeter to be inspected and tested for
accuracy at least once every six months. Upon the completion of such inspection
and of any adjustments necessary to cause such taximeter to operate within the
standards of accuracy approved by the County Department of Agriculture/Weights
and Measures, the carrier shall cause to be placed upon such meter a gummed
label having printed thereon the following: “This taximeter was inspected and
tested on (date) and found to comply with the standard of accuracy prescribed
by the San Bernardino County Department of Agriculture/Weights and Measures.”
The date on which such inspection was made shall be stamped in the blank space
provided for that purpose. No such label shall be removed except at the time a
subsequent inspection is made. The standard of accuracy prescribed by the
Department of Finance and Management Services for each taximeter shall be the
same standard established by the County Department of Agriculture/Weights and
Measures.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any driver of any taxicab, while carrying
passengers, to display the flag attached to the taximeter in such a position as
to denote that such vehicle is not employed, or to fail to throw the flag of
the taximeter to a position indicating the vehicle is unemployed at the
termination of each and every service.
   (F)   All charges for taxicab service shall be calculated and indicated by a
taximeter and at all times while the taxicab is engaged, the flag of the
taximeter shall be thrown into a position to register charges for mileage, or
into a position to register charges for waiting time. No taximeter shall be
used whose mechanism will register a combined charge for mileage and waiting
time in any single position, and no taximeter shall be so operated as to cause
any charge to be registered thereon except during the time while the taxicab is
engaged by a passenger or passengers.
   (G)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a dial-a-ride
taxicab.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3002, passed 7-15-1969; Ord. 3022, passed 10-
21-1969; Ord. 3585, passed 7-6-1976; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-
1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.350 WAITING TIME - ON-SCENE TIME - AMBULANCES.
   (A)   Waiting time. For the purpose of this chapter, WAITING TIME means the
time consumed while the taxicab is not in motion at the direction of a
passenger, and also the time consumed while waiting for a passenger after
having responded to a call; but no charge shall be made for the time consumed
by the premature response to a call, or for the first three minutes following
timely arrival of any location in response to a call or for time lost through
traffic interruptions or for delays caused by the inefficiency of the taxicab
or its driver.
   (B)   On-scene time - ambulances. On-scene time for ambulance service shall
begin from the time of the arrival of the ambulance at the scene of a medical
emergency and shall continue until the vehicle leaves the scene.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2078, passed 11-8-1955; Ord. 2979, passed 3-
18-1969; Ord. 3584, passed 7-6-1976; Ord. MC-943, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 5.76.360 RECEIPT TO BE GIVEN UPON REQUEST.
   It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, upon receiving full payment
for a fare as indicated by the taximeter, or for services rendered, to refuse
to give a receipt upon the request of any person making such payment. When the
taximeter is of the so-called “receipt type,” a receipt shall always be offered
the passenger upon receiving payment without a request therefor being made.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2078, passed 11-8-1955)
§ 5.76.370 TRANSACTION RECORDS.
   The holder of a franchise covered by this chapter shall keep a complete and
accurate record of each trip showing the time and place of origin and
destination of the trip, the number of passengers carried, the mileage and the
amount of fare or charge collected.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2154, passed 1-22-1957; Ord. MC-1480, passed
4-18-2018)
§ 5.76.380 INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   The Department of Finance and Management Services shall have the right to
inspect any and all books and records of any carrier at any and all reasonable
times, and any carrier under this chapter shall keep adequate and complete
books and records providing such detail as shall be required by the Department
of Finance and Management Services, and failure to keep and maintain such books
and records shall be grounds for suspension of any license or permit issued
under this chapter.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
 
§ 5.76.390 TAXI STANDS - APPLICATION FOR - STANDING RESTRICTED.
   It is unlawful for any carrier, or driver of any vehicle operated pursuant
to the terms of this chapter, to stand or permit to stand any such vehicle
while awaiting employment in front of any residential property, except when
answering a call for service at such residential property, or to stand or
permit to stand such vehicle at any other place designated by the Department of
Finance and Management Services.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3022, passed 10-21-1969; Ord. MC-1480, passed
4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.400 TAXI STANDS - ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   Permits may be issued by the Department of Finance and Management Services
to carriers operating pursuant to the terms of this chapter allowing the
vehicles of such carriers, while awaiting employment, to stand at certain
designated places upon the streets of the city; provided, however, that no such
permit shall be granted except upon the written application of the carrier
desiring such stand, filed with the Department of Finance and Management
Services, stating the proposed location of such stand. Any application for a
taxi stand may be acted upon by the Department of Finance and Management
Services without notice; providing such application is accompanied by the
written consent of the occupant of the first floor of any building of that
property in front of which it is desired to establish such vehicle stand, or if
any such building is a hotel, the written consent of the manager of the hotel,
or if there is no building on the premises in front of which it is desired that
such vehicle shall stand, or if there is a building and the first floor is not
occupied, then the written consent of the owner, agent or lessee of such
building or premises. In the event that the occupant, manager, owner, agent or
lessee hereinabove mentioned refuses, fails or neglects to grant consent to the
establishing of a taxi stand at the location proposed, the Department of
Finance and Management Services shall set a time of hearing on such
application, which shall be not less than ten days nor more than 30 days from
the time of filing such application, and each and every person qualified under
these provisions to make or offer a formal objection to establishing such taxi
stand at the location proposed shall be notified in writing not less than five
days prior to said hearing, at which time he or she shall be given an
opportunity to be heard. Notwithstanding the failure or refusal of the
occupant, manager, owner, agent or lessee as hereinabove mentioned to grant
consent to the establishing of a taxi stand in front of the building or
premises as proposed, or any formal objection offered thereto, the Director of
Finance and Management Services, with input from the city’s designated traffic
engineer, and with the approval of the City Manager, shall have the right to
grant or deny any application for a taxi stand.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.410 TAXI STANDS - PERMITS SUBJECT TO REVOCATION.
   All permits for taxi stands so issued shall contain a provision to the
effect that they are and they shall be subject to revocation by the Department
of Finance and Management Services with the approval of the City Manager at any
time.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.420 TAXI STANDS - AUTHORIZED USE ONLY.
   It is unlawful for any vehicle to occupy any regularly established taxi
stand unless such vehicle is one being operated by the carrier to which such
taxi stand has been assigned as herein provided, except with the consent of the
carrier assigned the taxi stand.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3022, passed 10-21-1969)
§ 5.76.430 TAXI STANDS - APPLICATION FEE - EXEMPTION.
   All applications for taxi stands, or for relocations thereof, shall be
accompanied by a fee of $10 for each stand to be established or relocated, or
such fee as may be subsequently set by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council. Applications for relocation shall be processed in like manner as an
original permit. In addition to the filing fee of $10, or such fee as may be
subsequently set by resolution of the Mayor and City Council, each application
shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant to reimburse the city
for all expenses incurred in locating or relocating a taxi stand, such
reimbursement to be made promptly upon being billed by the city.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2367, passed 7-5-1961; Ord. MC-1480, passed
4-18-2018)
§ 5.76.440 TAXI STAND MAINTENANCE FEE.
   In addition to all other fees established by this chapter, there shall
become due and payable on November 1 and shall become delinquent on the
following January 1 of each year a taxi stand maintenance fee of $15 per year,
or such fee as may be subsequently set by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council, for each taxi stand assigned to such carrier in return for which the
city shall cause each such taxi stand to be maintained by having them painted
twice each year.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2367, passed 7-5-1961; Ord. MC-1480, passed
4-18-2018)
§ 5.76.450 MANNER OF GIVING NOTICE.
   Whenever a notice is required to be given, unless different provisions
herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by
personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified, or by deposit in the
United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the
person to be notified at his or her last known business or residence address as
the same appears in the public records, or other records pertaining to the
matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to
have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. Proof of giving
such notice may be made by an affidavit of any person over the age of 18 years,
which affidavit shows service in conformity with this chapter or other
provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953)
§ 5.76.460 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983)
§ 5.76.470 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983)
§ 5.76.480 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983)
§ 5.76.490 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-943, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 5.76.500 MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION RATES.
   The rates which shall be charged the public by medical transportation
carriers shall be such as are prescribed in the carrier’s permit, and shall not
exceed the maximum rates sets forth in the schedule for such charges fixed by
resolution adopted by the Mayor and City Council. All rate changes subsequently
adopted shall be adopted only after a duly noticed public hearing is held
relating thereto.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 3584, passed 7-6-1976; Ord. 3878, passed 11-
7-1979; Ord. 3943, passed 6-3-1980; Ord. MC-190, passed 7-13-1982; Ord. MC-195,
passed 8-3-1982)
§ 5.76.510 AMBULANCE CARRIER REQUIREMENTS RATES.
   Every ambulance carrier shall:
   (A)   Use ambulances equipped with one side exit and rear exit sufficiently
large for the placing and removing of patients; the length of an ambulance
compartment shall provide adequate space at the head of the stretcher for an
ambulance technician to perform proper patient airway maintenance procedures;
the patient compartment shall provide space for the ambulance technician to
perform external cardiac compression on one patient when positioned at a right
angle to the side of the patient; the inside height of the patient compartment
shall be a minimum dimension of 52 inches from floor to ceiling;
   (B)   Equip all ambulances with two stretchers, oxygen and first-aid kits,
all of which shall be prescribed by the Bureau; and
   (C)   Render no free service under any conditions.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2078, passed 11-8-1955; Ord. 3584, passed 7-
6-1976)
§ 5.76.520 DRIVERS AND ATTENDANTS OF AMBULANCES.
   No ambulance carrier shall operate or maintain any vehicle with a crew of
less than two persons, one of whom shall be a qualified driver holding an
unexpired permit issued under the provisions of this chapter and at least one
member of each of said crews shall have had special experience or instructions
in proper methods in moving and handling the sick and injured and first-aid
treatment as shall meet the rules and regulations of the health officer of this
city, and shall have obtained a certificate from the health officer that he or
she is sufficiently proficient. These shall not take effect for 60 days after
employment.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2979, passed 3-18-1969)
§ 5.76.530 DRIVERS OF WHEELCHAIR PASSENGER TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES OR A
TRANSPORTATION VAN FOR THE HANDICAPPED.
   Any person driving a wheelchair transportation vehicle or a van for
transporting handicapped persons shall be a qualified driver holding an
unexpired permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and shall
have had special experience or instruction in proper methods in moving and
handling handicapped persons and shall have completed a course in first-aid
treatment as established by the American Red Cross or the United States Bureau
of Mines.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. 2979, passed 3-18-1969; Ord. 3486, passed 3-
19-1975)
§ 5.76.540 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-943, passed 6-6-1995)
 
§ 5.76.550 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-943, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 5.76.555 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-943, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 5.76.560 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-277, passed 6-8-1983)
§ 5.76.570 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 5.76.575 APPLICATION TO CITY.
   This chapter shall not be construed to apply to the city or to city officers
and employees acting in their capacity as such officers or employees.
(Ord. MC-879, passed 6-23-1993)
§ 5.76.580 ENFORCEMENT.
   Upon the granting of any permit to any carrier as provided by this chapter,
a copy of such permit shall be transmitted by the Department of Finance and
Management Services to the Chief of Police, who is charged with the duty of
enforcement of all provisions of this and other ordinances pertaining to the
operation of vehicles for hire.
(Ord. 1987, passed 7-7-1953; Ord. MC-1480, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.76.590 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 5.80: THEATERS - MOTION PICTURE AND ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
Section
   
5.80.010   Inspection and permit of theaters
   
5.80.020   Smoking in theaters
   
5.80.030   Fire extinguishers required
   
5.80.040   Reserved
   
5.80.050   Permit - expiration and renewal
   
5.80.060   Stage and theater electrician - requirements
   
5.80.070   Stage and theater electrician - permit
   
5.80.080   Apprentice operator or electrician - permit
   
5.80.090   Operator’s permit revoked for violation of law
   
5.80.100   Exception - churches, school and the like
   
5.80.110   Rewinding film in closed cabinet
   
5.80.120   Smoking or open flame in booth prohibited
   
5.80.130   Automatically operated safety devices - testing
   
5.80.140   Projection rooms and booths
   
5.80.150   Hazardous conditions
   
5.80.160   Employment of persons not duly registered to operate unlawful
   
5.80.170   Use of defective or damaged film unlawful
   
5.80.180   Use of open flame during performance unlawful - other restrictions
   
5.80.190   Violation of provisions unlawful
   
5.80.200   Applicability of other laws
   
5.80.210   Adult movies
   
5.80.220   Theater permit
   
5.80.230   Reserved
§ 5.80.010 INSPECTION AND PERMIT OF THEATERS.
   (A)   Any theater that has been closed for a continuous period of 30 days,
and any theater that has been erected or structurally altered or enlarged,
shall not be opened to the public for a performance without first having an
inspection by, and the written permission of, the City Development Services
Department and the Fire Department.
   (B)   Upon application by the owner, agent or lessee, the Development
Services Department shall cause an inspection to be made of all the public
safety devices of the theater building, and if they are found to comply with
the requirements hereof, shall cause such written permission to be issued
forthwith. In the event the public safety devices, appurtenances, exits or
stairways are not in a secure and safe condition, they must be put into such
condition before any performance is given or before the building is opened to
the public. The Development Services Department shall have the right to close
any theater building when any owner, lessee or manager, or his or her agent,
refuses to comply with the provisions hereof and such theater building shall
remain closed until all such requirements applicable thereto shall have been
complied with.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 5.80.020 SMOKING IN THEATERS.
   Smoking shall not be permitted in the auditorium or balcony of any theater
nor in any place where motion pictures are exhibited, except in toilets,
lounges, dressing rooms or offices.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.030 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS REQUIRED.
   In addition to the fire extinguishing equipment required in all Group A, B
and C occupancies, as defined by the Building Codes of this city, there shall
be installed not less than two Class A fire extinguishers, as defined in the
State Fire Marshal’s Code, on each floor, including the basement. Adjacent to
main switchboards there shall be maintained not less than two Class C fire
extinguishers, as defined in the State Fire Marshal’s Code. In addition
thereto, there shall be installed such number of fire axes and fire hooks as
the Bureau of Fire Prevention may order.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
Cross-reference:
   Building Codes, see Title 15,
Chapters 15.04 and
15.05
§ 5.80.040 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-46, passed 4-27-1981)
§ 5.80.050 PERMIT - EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on
January 1 of each year. A renewal permit may be issued upon application to the
chief electrical inspector and the payment of a renewal fee of $5. Any
application for renewal must be made on or before January 15 of each year. In
the event of failure to so apply for the renewal of a permit on or before
January 15, a person whose permit has expired must qualify as a new applicant
and take the examination therefor. No renewal permit shall be issued unless the
applicant submits satisfactory evidence to the chief electrical inspector that
he or she has worked as a motion picture machine operator for not less than 30
days during the previous calendar year.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.060 STAGE AND THEATER ELECTRICIAN - REQUIREMENTS.
   All electrical apparatus in a theater or motion picture house shall be in
charge of a registered journeyperson stage and theater electrician or motion
picture operator. Theaters using the stage for other purposes than motion
pictures shall have a registered stage and theater electrician in attendance at
all times when the theater is open.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.070 STAGE AND THEATER ELECTRICIAN - PERMIT.
   The permit fees and procedures for motion picture operators as set forth in
§§
5.80.040 and
5.80.050 shall apply also to stage and theater electricians.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.080 APPRENTICE OPERATOR OR ELECTRICIAN - PERMIT.
   The chief electrical inspector may, in accordance with such rules and
regulations as he or she may deem reasonably necessary, issue a permit to an
individual to act as an apprentice motion picture operator or apprentice stage
and theater electrician. A person desiring such a permit shall furnish to the
chief electrical inspector a written request therefor signed by the manager or
owner at the place where he or she intends to act as such an apprentice
operator or electrician before such permit may be granted. The applicant shall
also pay to the Development Services Department the sum of $5. A renewal
permit, as in §
5.80.050, may be issued with the payment of a renewal fee of $2.50. Such permit
entitles the permittee to operate only under supervision, at all times, of a
regularly licensed operator or electrician.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 5.80.090 OPERATOR’S PERMIT REVOKED FOR VIOLATION OF LAW.
   Any motion picture operator, stage and theater electrician or apprentice
found guilty, by a court of competent jurisdiction, of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter, or of any other law or ordinance regulating motion
picture machines, shall have his or her permit revoked by the chief electrical
inspector, and shall not be allowed for a period of one year thereafter, to
operate a motion picture machine or theater electrical equipment within the
city.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.100 EXCEPTION - CHURCHES, SCHOOL AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter relating to permits for motion picture
machine operators shall not apply to churches, schools, colleges or
institutions where the projection of films is used for educational purposes,
nor shall the provisions of this chapter relating to such permits apply to the
projection of motion pictures in private dwellings.
   (B)   The chief electrical inspector may, and is authorized to, establish
such rules and regulations as may best protect life and property in connection
with the operation of motion picture machines, in such occupancies, but which
shall not exceed requirements otherwise contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.110 REWINDING FILM IN CLOSED CABINET.
   All rewinding of film shall be done in an enclosed cabinet of a type
approved by the Fire Prevention Division. All film, records and other
combustible material used in connection with the projection of pictures shall
be kept in metal lockers or cabinets, except when in actual use.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.120 SMOKING OR OPEN FLAME IN BOOTH PROHIBITED.
   No person shall smoke or maintain any open flame or other source of ignition
within any motion picture machine booth. A sign bearing the words “No Smoking
Permitted” shall be displayed in a conspicuous location within such motion
picture machine booth.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.130 AUTOMATICALLY OPERATED SAFETY DEVICES - TESTING.
   The chief electrical inspector may require that all automatically operated
safety devices be operated not less than once every 30 days to determine that
they are in proper working condition.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.140 PROJECTION ROOMS AND BOOTHS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall be allowed inside any motion picture
machine booth when the same is being used for the projection of motion
pictures.
   (B)   The requirements for projection rooms shall be those requirements
which are enumerated in the latest edition of the International Building Code,
as adopted and amended by the city.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968; Ord. 3070, passed 5-12-1970)
§ 5.80.150 HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS.
   It is unlawful to admit or allow the admission of the public to a theater
after receiving notice or knowledge of the existence of any hazardous condition
within the theater which is injurious to the public health, safety or welfare.
Such hazardous conditions may include, but are not limited to, loose or
improperly attached fixtures; unsanitary conditions; damaged or defective
seats; defects in or damage to the floor, floor covering or carpeting;
obstructions in aisles; and insufficient illumination or inoperative light
bulbs.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968; Ord. 3070, passed 5-12-1970)
§ 5.80.160 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS NOT DULY REGISTERED TO OPERATE UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as owner,
manager, agent or otherwise, to procure, employ or permit, or cause to be
procured, employed or permitted, any person not duly registered, as provided in
this chapter, to operate or assist in the operation of any motion picture
projector or equipment of which such owner, firm or corporation has charge or
control.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.170 USE OF DEFECTIVE OR DAMAGED FILM UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any one to operate, or cause to be operated, a motion
picture projector with defective or damaged film which is likely to jeopardize
public safety. It shall be the duty of the projectionist to give the owner or
manager a written notice upon finding any film unsafe for use in the city and a
duplicate of said notice shall be sent to the office of the chief electrical
inspector and the Fire Prevention Division.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.180 USE OF OPEN FLAME DURING PERFORMANCE UNLAWFUL - OTHER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is unlawful to allow an open flame to be used upon any stage of any
theater during any performance without first obtaining a permit in writing from
the chief engineer of the Fire Department. When gas heaters are used for
heating purposes in the auditorium, these must be of the forced air type. It is
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to allow any foliage, straw, hay
or other combustible material upon any stage in any theater, until the same is
made fireproof by an application of fireproofing solution, and then only after
inspection has been made by the chief engineer of the Fire Department, or his
or her duly authorized representatives; and it is unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to allow any automobile, motorcycle or any other gasoline driven
vehicle upon any stage of any theater unless all gasoline is first removed from
the tank thereof.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.190 VIOLATION OF PROVISIONS UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning, managing,
conducting or in control of any theater or motion picture theater to allow,
suffer or permit any violation of the provisions of this chapter and any of the
provisions of the Fire Code, as promulgated by the National Fire Protection
Association, which has been or may hereafter be established by the city and
adopted as rules and regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and
property from fire.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.200 APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS.
   In addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter, each owner or
operator of a theater or motion picture house is subject to the Cal. Labor
Code, Division 2, Part 9, Chapter 1, Article 1 (§§ 2260 et seq.) and any other
applicable law or ordinance.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.210 ADULT MOVIES.
   (A)   The manager or any person in control or charge of a theater shall
determine whether each motion picture is recommended for adult viewing only
before such motion picture is shown or exhibited publicly, and knowingly shall
not sell or permit the sale of any admission ticket to view such motion picture
recommended for adult viewing only to, or permit the viewing thereof by, any
unmarried minor person under the age of 18 years unless such minor person is
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or presents written consent or
permission therefor from and signed by such parent or guardian.
   (B)   Any advertisement or publication printed or distributed in the city
concerning a motion picture which has been recommended for adult viewing only
by the manager or any person in control or charge of a theater where such
motion picture is exhibited or will be exhibited publicly shall contain the
phrase “Recommended For Adults Only” in letters as large and high as the
majority of letters in such advertisement or publication.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968)
§ 5.80.220 THEATER PERMIT.
   (A)   The owner or manager of each theater where motion pictures or any
picture projected from slides or films are publicly exhibited shall apply for a
theater permit from the Chief of Police of the city within 30 days from the
adoption of this section. The Chief shall issue the permit if he or she finds
that the applicant has complied with each law or ordinance relating to theaters
and the exhibition of motion pictures or any picture projected from films or
slides.
   (B)   The Chief shall suspend any theater permit issued by him or her if he
or she finds that the permittee or such permittee’s agent or employee has been
or is knowingly violating any provision of this chapter or other applicable
ordinance or law. The determination of the Chief with regard to matters of
suspension shall be appealable to the Mayor and City Council in the same manner
as set forth in
Chapter 2.64.
   (C)   The Chief, in the case of such suspension, shall either personally
serve or serve by the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
permittee, a written order of suspension stating the reasons for such
suspension. The order shall be effective 24 hours after the same is either
personally served, or 48 hours after the same has been deposited in the course
of the United States mail.
   (D)   An order of suspension from which an appeal is taken as provided in
this section shall be of no force or effect until such appeal is fully
determined.
(Ord. 2900, passed 4-23-1968; Ord. MC-410, passed 9-18-1984)
§ 5.80.230 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 5.82: OPERATOR PERMIT REGULATIONS
Section
   
5.82.010   Findings
   
5.82.020   Permit - required
   
5.82.030   Permit - application
   
5.82.040   Application for permit - investigation fee
   
5.82.050   Investigation
   
5.82.060   Permit - duration
   
5.82.070   Permit - conditions
   
5.82.080   Permit - denial
   
5.82.090   Notice of decision by Chief of Police
   
5.82.100   Right of appeal to City Manager
   
5.82.110   Notice of appeal - time limit
   
5.82.120   Notice of appeal - contents
   
5.82.130   Action by the City Clerk
   
5.82.140   Consideration by the City Manager
   
5.82.150   Notification of the City Manager’s decision
   
5.82.160   Suspension or revocation of operator’s permit
   
5.82.170   Notice of hearing
   
5.82.180   Failure to appear at the hearing
   
5.82.190   Suspension - designated
   
5.82.195   Revocation
   
5.82.200   Notice of decision of City Manager
   
5.82.210   Permit - abandonment
   
5.82.220   Permit - transfer
   
5.82.230   Severability
   
5.82.240   Reserved
   
5.82.250   Reserved
§ 5.82.010 FINDINGS.
   The city is endeavoring to reduce acts of sexual misconduct, drug
trafficking and “fencing” activities occurring in the city, and to improve the
business environment in the city. In furtherance of these goals, and to promote
the health, safety and welfare of the public, this chapter requires regulatory
permits for the purpose of ensuring that preventive action is taken to curb
criminal activities from occurring on the business premises or from being
involved with the employees or business operations. The criminal activities
interfere with the safe operation of the businesses in the presence of patrons
and visitors, and the continuance of the premises will be detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the public. It is further found that such
criminal activities have occurred and are likely to continue to occur on many
business premises in the city.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986)
§ 5.82.020 PERMIT - REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence, manage or conduct any
type of business enumerated herein, without a valid and unsuspended operator’s
permit issued hereunder and to not, at all times, commence, manage or conduct
such business in compliance with all regulations of such business imposed under
or by this chapter, including all conditions imposed by the Chief of Police by
or under §
5.82.070.
   (B)   The commencement, management or conducting of any business regulated
by this chapter without an operator’s permit as required or in a manner that is
not in compliance with all regulations imposed under or by this chapter,
including all conditions imposed by the Chief of Police by or under §
5.82.070, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter for each and
every day that such business is so commenced, managed or conducted.
   (C)   For the purposes of this chapter, PERSON shall include, but is not
limited to, any individual who commences, manages or conducts a business
regulated by this chapter, whether as principal or agent, clerk or employee,
acting personally or for any other person, or for any corporate entity, or as
an officer of any company, partnership or corporation, or otherwise.
   (D)   This chapter shall apply to any person commencing, managing or
conducting any of the following businesses:
      (1)   Hotel; and
      (2)   Motel.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-692, passed 12-19-1989; Ord. MC-809,
passed 10-8-1991; Ord. MC-1305, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-
2018)
§ 5.82.030 PERMIT - APPLICATION.
   An applicant for a permit for the operation of any such hotel or motel shall
apply for and obtain an operator’s permit. The application for such permit
shall be filed with the Department of Finance and Management Services, shall be
signed under penalty of perjury and shall be upon a form supplied by the
Department of Finance and Management Services. The application shall contain
the true names, addresses and criminal convictions during the ten years
immediately preceding the date of the application, if any (except for
infractions of the California Vehicle Code), of the applicant and all persons
financially interested in the applicant’s business, and such other information
as may reasonably be deemed necessary by the Police Department.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-962, passed 3-20-1996; Ord. MC-809,
passed 10-8-1991; Ord. MC-884, passed 9-8-1993; Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-2018;
Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.82.040 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT - INVESTIGATION FEE.
   Each application for an operator’s permit shall be accompanied by a non-
refundable investigative fee in an amount established by resolution of the
Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-519, passed 5-20-1986; Ord. MC-976, passed 7-31-1996; Ord. MC-1472,
passed 3-7-2018)
§ 5.82.050 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall refer the application to a subordinate
officer who shall fully investigate the applicant and the facts and
circumstances concerning the application submitted, and who shall report, in
writing to the Police Chief, his or her recommendations and reasons therefor as
to whether such operator’s permit should be granted or denied.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall consider any relevant factual material
relating to such applicant, and shall authorize the issuance of an operator’s
permit as required by this chapter only upon finding that the following apply.
      (1)   During the ten years immediately preceding the date of the
application, the applicant has not been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo
contendere to, any felony or crime of moral turpitude or been found in
violation of laws or a regulation in a governmental quasi-judicial proceeding
when the facts underlying such proceeding or conviction show a nexus between
the crime or violation and the particular business operations or indicate the
lack of qualities essential to protect the public health, safety and welfare in
operations under the permit.
      (2)   The applicant is not required to register under Cal. Penal Code, §
290 or Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§ 11591 and 11591.5.
      (3)   The applicant has not knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application process, or on any
document required by the city in conjunction therewith.
      (4)   The location for which the permit is sought is compatible with the
neighborhood and suitable for the type of operation proposed, and will not pose
a public nuisance, as defined in this code, in the neighborhood or disrupt the
peace and solitude of a residential area.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-505, passed 3-19-1986; Ord. MC-884,
passed 9-8-1993; Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 5.82.060 PERMIT - DURATION.
   Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid until such time as
there is a change of ownership of the business or until the permit is
suspended, abandoned or revoked.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-519, passed 5-20-1986; Ord. MC-696,
passed 1-9-1990)
§ 5.82.070 PERMIT - CONDITIONS.
   The Chief of Police may impose conditions of approval deemed necessary to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986)
§ 5.82.080 PERMIT - DENIAL.
   If the Chief of Police finds any of the facts prohibiting issuance of a
permit, as set forth in §
5.82.050, exist, the Chief of Police shall deny the application.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986)
§ 5.82.090 NOTICE OF DECISION BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   Within 45 calendar days of the date the application is filed, the Chief of
Police shall give written notices of his or her decision to the applicant, to
the Department of Finance and Management Services and to any other person
specifically requesting such notice.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.82.100 RIGHT OF APPEAL TO CITY MANAGER.
   Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police with
reference to the issuance, conditional issuance or denial of a permit may
appeal therefrom by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk
directed to the City Manager.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 5.82.110 NOTICE OF APPEAL - TIME LIMIT.
   Any such notice of appeal shall not be valid and shall not be acted upon
unless filed within 15 calendar days after the date of the action or decision
which is being appealed.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986)
 
§ 5.82.120 NOTICE OF APPEAL - CONTENTS.
   (A)   The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth:
      (1)   The specific action appealed from;
      (2)   The specific grounds of appeal; and
      (3)   The relief or action sought from the City Manager.
   (B)   In the event any notice of appeal fails to set forth any information
required by this section, the City Clerk shall return the same to the appellant
with a statement of the respects in which it is deficient, and the applicant
shall thereafter be allowed five calendar days in which to perfect and refile
his or her notice of appeal.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 5.82.130 ACTION BY THE CITY CLERK.
   Upon the timely filing of a notice of appeal in proper form, the City Clerk
shall schedule the matter promptly and within 45 days for hearing before the
City Manager.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 5.82.140 CONSIDERATION BY THE CITY MANAGER.
   At the time of consideration of the appeal by the City Manager, the
appellant shall present evidence limited to the specific grounds of appeal and
matters set forth in his or her notice of appeal. The appellant shall have the
burden of establishing cause why the action appealed from should be altered,
reversed or modified. The Police Department shall have the opportunity to
answer arguments made and rebut new evidence offered, if any. The City Manager
shall review the evidence, findings and record relating to the decision or
action and may, in his or her discretion, receive new or additional evidence.
Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to any appeal hearing.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 5.82.150 NOTIFICATION OF THE CITY MANAGER’S DECISION.
   Within ten calendar days after reaching a determination on the appeal, the
City Manager shall give written notice of his or her decision to the appellant,
the Police Department, the Department of Finance and Management Services and to
any other person specifically requesting such notice.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 5.82.160 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF OPERATOR’S PERMIT.
   (A)   Upon receipt of satisfactory evidence of any of the following grounds,
the City Manager may hold a hearing to consider the suspension or revocation of
a permit issued under this chapter.
   (B)   For suspension, the grounds are as follows:
      (1)   The permittee has failed to comply with any condition imposed on
the permit;
      (2)   The permittee has failed to timely pay any license or permit fees
that are provided for under the provisions of this code; and
      (3)   The existence of unsanitary conditions, noise, disturbances or
other conditions at the premises and related to the business which causes a
public nuisance, or which is detrimental to the public health, safety or
welfare.
   (C)   For revocation, the grounds are as follows.
      (1)   The permittee, operator or employee of the permittee has engaged in
or permitted conduct at the business premises which constitutes a felony or
crime of moral turpitude, and the permittee knew, or with the exercise of
reasonable diligence should have known, of such criminal conduct and failed to
take remedial or preventive action. Such conduct may include, but shall not be
limited to, acts of sexual misconduct, illicit drug transactions or “fencing”
of personal property occurring on the premises of the business.
      (2)   Permittee has made any material misstatement in the application for
such permit or the permit was acquired by fraud.
      (3)   Any of the grounds that would warrant the denial of the issuance of
such permit at the time of application.
      (4)   There have been two or more suspensions of the permit under this
chapter in the proceeding 18 months.
   (D)   The finding of any one of the above grounds shall be sufficient to
support a suspension or revocation, respectively, of a permit.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-505, passed 3-19-1986; Ord. MC-893,
passed 1-12-1994; Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 5.82.170 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   The permittee shall be notified in writing that a hearing which may result
in suspension or revocation of the permit will be held, the place where the
hearing will be held and the date and time thereof, which shall not be sooner
than ten calendar days after service of such notice of hearing. All notices
provided for in this section shall be personally served upon the permittee, or
by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of such permittee
in the presence of a competent member of the household or a person apparently
in charge of permittee’s place of business at least 18 years of age, who shall
be informed of the contents thereof. In the event service cannot be made in the
foregoing manner, then a copy of such notice shall be mailed, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known address of such
permittee at his or her place of business or residence at least ten calendar
days prior to the date of such hearing. The notice shall also contain a general
statement of the nature of the grounds of the proposed suspension and that the
permittee may be represented by counsel at the hearing.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-893, passed 1-12-1994)
§ 5.82.180 FAILURE TO APPEAR AT THE HEARING.
   In the event that the permittee, or counsel representing the permittee,
fails to appear at the hearing, the evidence of the existence of facts which
are presented and which constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of
the permit may be used by the City Manager as the basis of his or her decision.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-893, passed 1-12-1994; Ord. MC-1472,
passed 3-7-2018)
§ 5.82.190 SUSPENSION - DESIGNATED.
   If, after the conclusion of a hearing held to consider the suspension of a
permit issued under this chapter, it is determined that any of the grounds for
suspension of an operator’s permit exist, then said permit shall be suspended
for one month for the first suspension; two months for the second suspension;
and six months for each additional suspension thereof.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986)
§ 5.82.195 REVOCATION.
   If, after the conclusion of a hearing held to consider the revocation of a
permit issued under this chapter, it is determined that any of the grounds for
revocation of an operator’s permit exist, then such permit shall be revoked.
(Ord. MC-893, passed 1-12-1994)
§ 5.82.200 NOTICE OF DECISION OF CITY MANAGER.
   A copy of the decision of the City Manager specifying findings of fact and
conclusions for the decision shall be furnished to the permittee, or
permittee’s designated representative. The decision of the City Manager shall
be final when issued.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 5.82.210 PERMIT - ABANDONMENT.
   A permit shall be deemed abandoned within the terms of this chapter where
the business or activity has had no reported sales or activity for a period of
at least 180 consecutive days. Exceptions are temporary closures for repairs,
alterations or other similar situations.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-893, passed 1-12-1994; Ord. MC-1472,
passed 3-7-2018)
§ 5.82.220 PERMIT - TRANSFER.
   No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 5.82.230 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of
this chapter is invalid or shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall
not affect the validity of the remainder.
(Ord. MC-502, passed 3-6-1986; Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 5.82.240 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 5.82.250 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1472, passed 3-7-2018)
CHAPTER 5.84: ENFORCEMENT - CITING AUTHORITY
Section
   
5.84.010   Enforcement
   
5.84.015   Penalties for violation
   
5.84.020   Right of entry - exhibition of license
§ 5.84.010 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Department responsible for issuing a particular
permit, or its authorized representatives, to enforce the provisions of this
title with respect to such permit.
(Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983; Ord. MC-1487, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 5.84.015 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this
title other than those of
Chapters 5.12,
5.36,
5.40,
5.48 and
5.52 is guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable
in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010. Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the
provisions of
Chapters 5.12,
5.36,
5.40,
5.48 and
5.52 is guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable
in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 5.84.020 RIGHT OF ENTRY - EXHIBITION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The head of the department issuing a particular permit, the Chief of
Police, or his or her authorized representatives, are empowered to enter,
during business hours, free of charge, any place of business, or to approach
any person apparently conducting or employed in the operation of the business,
for which a license or permit is required pursuant to this title, and to demand
the exhibition of such license or permit for the current term. If such person
then and there fails to exhibit such license or permit, the authorized
representative or police officer is authorized and empowered to cite the person
and issue a notice to appear pursuant to the provisions of this title, relating
to licensing of businesses within the city.
   (B)   Such representatives and police officers shall ascertain the name of
any person, firm or corporation or association engaged in or carrying on any
business, show, exhibition or game in the city who or which is liable to obtain
and pay for a license and shall require that such license be obtained and that
the appropriate fee or tax be paid. The Police Department and other departments
of the city shall assist and cooperate as may be required to enable the
fulfillment of the imposed duties and responsibilities hereunder.
(Ord. MC-302, passed 9-7-1983; Ord. MC-1487, passed 4-18-2018)
TITLE 6: ANIMALS
   Chapter
      
6.01.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
6.02.   NOISY ANIMALS
      
6.03.   KEEPING OF NON-EQUINE LIVESTOCK
      
6.04.   HORSES
      
6.05.   FOWL
      
6.06.   PIGEONS
      
6.07.   WILD, EXOTIC, DANGEROUS OR NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS IN CAPTIVITY
      
6.08.   DOGS
      
6.09.   VICIOUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS
      
6.10.   CATS
      
6.11.   QUARANTINE
      
6.12.   POLICE DOGS
      
6.13.   ENFORCEMENT - PENALTY
      
6.14.   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on animals generally, see Cal. Food and Agriculture Code, §§
16301 et seq.
CHAPTER 6.01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
6.01.010   Findings
   
6.01.020   Definitions
   
6.01.030   Applicability of title
   
6.01.040   Fee schedules
   
6.01.050   Construction of buildings to prevent escape
   
6.01.060   Care of animals by owner
   
6.01.070   Protection of public
   
6.01.080   Ventilation
   
6.01.090   Commercial animal runs
   
6.01.100   Examination and treatment by veterinarian
   
6.01.110   Correction of violations
   
6.01.120   Denial of license or permit
   
6.01.130   Administration and enforcement of title
   
6.01.140   Abandonment of animal
   
6.01.150   Authority to apprehend livestock - fees
   
6.01.160   Mandatory spay or neutering of dogs
   
6.01.170   Impoundment of dogs
   
6.01.180   Denial or revocation of unaltered dog license or exempt status
   
6.01.190   Allocation of fees collected
§ 6.01.010 FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find that, in order to protect the residents of
the city, and in order to protect the welfare of the animals within the city,
the following minimum standards of care for animals within the city shall be
established and enforced to encourage responsible animal ownership.
§ 6.01.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. To desert, forsake or absolutely give up an animal without having
secured another owner or custodian for the animal or by failing to provide the
elements of basic care, as set forth in §
6.01.060, for a period of 48 hours or more.
   ADEQUATE CARE or CARE. The responsible practice of good animal husbandry,
handling, production, management, confinement, feeding, watering, protection,
shelter, transportation, treatment, grooming, the provision of veterinary care
when needed to prevent suffering or impairment of health and, when necessary,
euthanasia, appropriate for the age, species, condition, size and type of the
animal.
   ADEQUATE EXERCISE or EXERCISE. The opportunity for the animal to
sufficiently move to maintain normal muscle tone and mass for the age, species,
size and condition of the animal.
   ADEQUATE FEED. Access to, and the provision of, food which is of sufficient
quantity and nutritive value to maintain each animal in good health; is
accessible to each animal; is prepared so as to permit ease of consumption for
the age, species, condition, size and type of each animal; is provided in a
clean and sanitary manner; is placed so as to minimize contamination by
excrement and pests; and is provided at suitable intervals for the species, age
and condition of the animal, but at least once daily, except as prescribed by a
veterinarian or as dictated by naturally occurring states of hibernation or
fasting normal for the species.
   ADEQUATE SHELTER or SHELTER. Provision of, and access to, shelter that is
suitable for the species, age, condition, size and type of each animal;
provides adequate space for each animal; is safe and protects each animal from
injury, rain, hail, direct sunlight, standing water, the adverse effects of
heat or cold, physical suffering and impairment of health; is properly cleaned;
enables each animal to be clean and dry, except when detrimental to the
species; and for dogs and cats, provides a solid surface, resting platform,
pad, floor mat or similar device that is large enough for the animal to lie on
in a normal manner and can be maintained in a sanitary manner. Under this
title, kennels whose wire grid or slat floors do not protect the animal’s feet
or toes from injury are not ADEQUATE SHELTER.
   ADEQUATE SPACE.
      (1)   Means sufficient space to allow each animal to:
         (a)   Easily stand, sit, lie, turn about and make all other normal
body movements in a comfortable, normal position for the animal; and
         (b)   Interact safely with other animals in the enclosure.
      (2)   When an animal is tethered, ADEQUATE SPACE means a tether that
permits the actions in divisions (1)(a) and (1)(b) above and is appropriate to
the age and size of the animal according to professionally accepted standards
for the species; is attached to the animal by a properly applied collar, halter
or harness configured so as to protect the animal from injury and prevent the
animal or tether from becoming entangled with other objects or animals, or from
extending over an object or edge that could result in the strangulation or
injury of the animal; and is at least eight feet in length, except when the
animal is being walked on a leash or is attached by a tether to a lead line.
When freedom of movement would endanger the animal, temporarily and
appropriately restricting movement of the animal according to professionally
accepted standards for the species is considered provision of ADEQUATE SPACE.
   ADEQUATE WATER. Provision of, and access to, clean, fresh, potable water of
a drinkable temperature which is provided in a suitable manner, in sufficient
volume and at suitable intervals, but at least once every 12 hours, to maintain
normal hydration for the age, species, condition, size and type of each animal,
except as prescribed by a veterinarian or as dictated by naturally occurring
states of hibernation or fasting normal for the species; and is provided in
clean, durable receptacles which are accessible to each animal and are placed
so as to minimize contamination of the water by excrement and pests or an
alternative source of hydration consistent with generally accepted husbandry
practices.
   AMBIENT TEMPERATURE. The temperature surrounding the animal.
   ANIMAL. Any non-human vertebrate species including fish, except those fish
captured and killed or disposed of in a manner consistent with contemporary
practices.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. A facility operated by any locality, for the purpose of
impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals;
or a facility operated for the same purpose under a contract with any county,
city, town or incorporated humane society or society for the prevention of
cruelty to animals.
   COLLAR. A well-fitted device, appropriate to the age and size of the animal,
attached to the animal’s neck in such a way as to prevent trauma or injury to
the animal. A chain is not considered an acceptable COLLAR, except during
training sessions under the direct supervision of an owner or handler.
   COMPANION ANIMAL. Any domestic or feral dog, domestic or feral cat, non-
human primate, guinea pig, hamster, rabbit not raised for human food or fiber,
exotic or native animal, reptile, exotic or native bird or any animal under the
care, custody or ownership of a person or any animal which is bought, sold,
traded or bartered by any person. Agricultural animals, game species or any
animals regulated under federal law as research animals shall not be considered
COMPANION ANIMALS for the purposes of this title.
   DIRECT AND IMMEDIATE THREAT. Any clear and immediate danger to an animal’s
health, safety or life.
   EMERGENCY VETERINARY TREATMENT. Veterinary treatment to prevent or alleviate
suffering, to stabilize a life-threatening condition or to prevent further
transmission or progression of disease.
   ENCLOSURE. Structure used to house or restrict animals from running at large
or harming themselves and should be of appropriate size for the age, species
and condition of the animal consistent with generally accepted husbandry
standards for the species.
   EUTHANASIA. The humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method
that involves instantaneous unconsciousness and immediate death or by a method
that involves anesthesia, produced by an agent which causes painless loss of
consciousness and death during such loss of consciousness.
   EXHIBITOR. Any person or business who shows or handles any animals for
public or private purposes.
   GROOMER. Any person who, for a fee, cleans, trims, brushes, makes neat,
manicures or treats for external parasites an animal.
   GROOMING. Maintaining an animal’s coat and body condition in an appropriate
state for the age and species of the animal, including such things as cleaning,
trimming, thinning or brushing the coat, manicuring and removing foreign
objects.
   HOUSING FACILITY. Any room, building or area used to contain a primary
enclosure or enclosures.
   HUMANE. Any action taken in consideration of, and with the intent to provide
for, the animal’s behavioral and physical health and well-being.
   KENNEL. Any establishment in which four or more canines, six or more felines
or hybrids of either are kept for the purpose of breeding, hunting, training,
renting, buying, boarding, selling or showing.
   LIVESTOCK. All domestic or domesticated: bovine animals (cattle type);
equine animals (horse type); ovine animals (sheep type); porcine animals (pig
type); cervine animals (deer like); caprine animals (goat type); ratite animals
(ostrich type); enclosed domesticated rabbits or hares raised for human food or
fiber; or any other individual animal specifically raised for food or fiber,
except companion animals.
   OWNER. Any person who:
      (1)   Has a right of property in an animal;
      (2)   Keeps or harbors an animal;
      (3)   Has an animal in his or her care; or
      (4)   Acts as a custodian of an animal.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, joint-stock company, corporation,
association, trust, estate or other legal entity.
   PET SHOP. An establishment where companion animals are bought, sold,
exchanged or offered for sale or exchange to the general public.
   POULTRY. All domestic fowl and game birds bred in captivity.
   PRIMARY ENCLOSURE. Any structure used to immediately restrict an animal or
animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, cage, compartment or
hutch. For tethered animals, the term includes the shelter and the area within
reach of the tether.
   PROPERLY CLEANED. Carcasses, debris, food, waste and excrement are removed
from the yard, property, house and primary enclosure with sufficient frequency
to minimize the animal’s contact with the above-mentioned contaminants; that
the primary enclosure is sanitized with sufficient frequency to minimize odors,
insects and the hazards of disease preventing the animals confined therein from
being directly or indirectly sprayed with the stream of water, or directly or
indirectly exposed to hazardous chemicals or disinfectants.
   PROPERLY LIGHTED. Sufficient illumination to permit routine inspections,
maintenance, cleaning and housekeeping of the housing facility, and observation
of the animal; to provide regular diurnal lighting cycles of either natural or
artificial light, uniformly diffused throughout the animal facilities; and to
promote the well-being of the animals.
   SANITIZE. To make physically clean and to remove and destroy, to a practical
minimum, agents injurious to health.
   TRANSPORTATION or TRANSPORT. The responsible handling, moving or shipping of
animals in the person’s ownership, custody or charge, appropriate for the age,
species, condition, size and type of the animal.
   VETERINARY TREATMENT. Treatment by, or on the order of, a duly licensed
veterinarian.
   WILD, EXOTIC, DANGEROUS, POISONOUS or NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Any animals not
specifically addressed within this title.
   REGISTERED ANIMAL. A purebred dog recognized by and registered with the
American Kennel Club (“AKC”), United Kennel Club (“UKC”) or other national
registry.
(Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006; Ord. MC-1241, passed 3-6-2007)
§ 6.01.030 APPLICABILITY OF TITLE.
   (A)   Every person, firm, corporation or other business enterprise within
the city who owns, conducts, manages or operates any animal establishment for
which special authorization and a license is required by this title shall
comply with each of the conditions set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   The owner, manager or operator of any activity or facility subject to
this title shall be responsible for any violation of this title by an employee.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3334, passed 2-28-1973)
§ 6.01.040 FEE SCHEDULES.
   All fees assessed in conjunction with the enforcement of Title 6, “Animals,”
shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3334, passed 2-28-1973; Ord. MC-815, passed
12-17-1991)
§ 6.01.050 CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS TO PREVENT ESCAPE.
   Animal buildings and enclosures shall be so constructed and maintained as to
prevent the escape of animals.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3334, passed 2-28-1973)
§ 6.01.060 CARE OF ANIMALS BY OWNER.
   (A)   Each owner shall provide for each of his or her companion animals:
      (1)   Adequate feed;
      (2)   Adequate water;
      (3)   Adequate shelter that is properly cleaned;
      (4)   Adequate space in the primary enclosure for the particular type of
animal depending upon its age, size, species and weight;
      (5)   Adequate exercise;
      (6)   Adequate care, treatment and transportation; and
      (7)   Veterinary care when needed or to prevent suffering or disease
transmission.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall also apply to every animal
shelter, dealer, pet shop, exhibitor, kennel, groomer and boarding
establishment.
§ 6.01.070 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC.
   All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the public from the
animals and animals from the public.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3334, passed 2-28-1973)
§ 6.01.080 VENTILATION.
   Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained shall be properly
ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling shall be
provided as required according to physical needs of the animals and consistent
with generally accepted husbandry practices.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3334, passed 2-28-1973)
§ 6.01.090 COMMERCIAL ANIMAL RUNS.
   Animal runs for commercial operations, such as veterinary clinics or
boarding kennels, shall be of approved construction and shall be provided with
adequate waste and manure disposal and for drainage into an approved sewer or
individual sewer disposal installation.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3334, passed 2-28-1973)
§ 6.01.100 EXAMINATION AND TREATMENT BY VETERINARIAN.
   All animals shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian for examination and
treatment if so ordered by the animal control officer.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3334, passed 2-28-1973)
§ 6.01.110 CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   Every violation of applicable regulation shall be corrected within a
reasonable time to be specified by the animal control officer.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3334, passed 2-28-1973)
§ 6.01.120 DENIAL OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   Failure of the applicant for a license or permit to comply with any of the
conditions enumerated in this title shall be deemed just cause for the denial
or revocation of any license or permit, whether original or renewal.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3334, passed 2-28-1973)
§ 6.01.130 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TITLE.
   (A)   The Animal Control Division shall administer and enforce this title
and other titles pertaining to animals or other species; and all provisions of
the penal laws of the state relating to cruelty to animals.
   (B)   In the performance of his or her duties, the Animal Control Director,
any animal control officer and any authorized employee of the Animal Control
Division shall have the power and authority to enforce the provisions of this
title and other titles pertaining to animals or other species, including
issuance of notices to appear pursuant to Cal. Penal Code, Part 2, Title 3,
Chapters 5C and 5D (commencing with § 853.5), for any offense which is a
violation of this title relating to animals and fowl, or any Code of
Regulations or penal law of the state relating to animals and fowl or cruelty
to animals.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3301, passed 10-24-1972; Ord. 3926, passed 4-
14-1980; Ord. 3968, passed 9-23-1980; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-
1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.01.140 ABANDONMENT OF ANIMAL.
   No person shall abandon any animal. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the release of an animal, by its owner, to an animal
shelter, humane society, SPCA or other private animal rescue group.
(Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.01.150 AUTHORITY TO APPREHEND LIVESTOCK - FEES.
   (A)   Any livestock, other than bovine animals, found running at large in
the city shall be apprehended by the animal control officer. The owner of any
apprehended livestock shall pay apprehension fees and daily board and care fees
prior to recovering the livestock from the animal control officer. Apprehension
fees and board and care fees shall be set by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council. Unclaimed livestock may be disposed of by a public sale by sealed
bids. The livestock shall be sold to the highest bidder. The Director of Animal
Control shall determine minimum bid amounts. Unclaimed livestock not disposed
of by a public sale by sealed bids may be destroyed after seven calendar days.
   (B)   Any bovine animal found running at large in the city shall be
apprehended by the animal control officer. Within five days of the
apprehension, the owner of any apprehended bovine animal shall pay apprehension
fees and daily board and care fees prior to recovering the bovine animal from
the Animal Control Office. Apprehension fees and board and care fees shall be
set by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (C)   Within five days from the date of apprehension, the Director of Animal
Control shall notify the State Director of Food and Agriculture of any
unclaimed bovine animal, horse, mule or burro, and shall turn over to the State
Director of Food and Agriculture any bovine animal, pursuant to the provisions
of Cal. Food and Agricultural Code, §§ 17001 et seq.
(Ord. MC-21, passed 1-7-1981; Ord. MC-145, passed 3-16-1982)
§ 6.01.160 MANDATORY SPAY OR NEUTERING OF DOGS.
   (A)   No person may own, keep, harbor or maintain a dog over the age of four
months which has not been spayed or neutered unless the dog is exempt as
follows:
      (1)   The dog is a registered purebred, as defined in §
6.01.020, and has competed in at least one dog show or sporting competition
sanctioned by a national registry within the last 365 calendar days or has
earned a conformation, obedience, agility, carting, herding, protection, rally,
sporting, working or other title from a purebred dog registry;
      (2)   The animal is unable to be spayed or neutered without a high
likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death due to age or infirmity.
The owner or custodian must obtain written confirmation to that effect from a
licensed veterinarian. The statement must also include the date by which the
animal may be safely spayed or neutered, if at all possible; or
      (3)   Dogs used by law enforcement agencies.
   (B)   After the effective date of this chapter, pet owners will have 60 days
to come into compliance. New pet owners or pet owners new to the city will have
60 days to come into compliance.
§ 6.01.170 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS.
   (A)   When a dog is impounded, the owner or custodian may reclaim the
animal; provided one of the following occurs.
      (1)   The owner shows proof the animal is spayed or neutered.
      (2)   The owner shall pay a spay/neuter deposit of $100 and shall then
have 30 days to have the animal spayed or neutered. Upon proof of the spaying
or neutering, the $100 deposit will be refunded to the pet owner. Failure to
have the animal spayed or neutered in that time frame will result in forfeiture
of the deposit.
      (3)   Exempt animals whose status was denied or revoked under the
provisions of §
6.01.180 will be required to comply with division (A)(1) above.
   (B)   Costs for impoundment.
      (1)   The owner of an unaltered animal shall be responsible for the costs
of impoundment, including outstanding fines, fees or any amount set by the
Mayor and City Council.
      (2)   If any person does not provide proof of the animal owner’s identity
or provide satisfactory proof of ownership, claim the animal and pay any sums
due prior to the expiration of the holding period prescribed by state law, the
animal shall become the property of the city.
§ 6.01.180 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF UNALTERED DOG LICENSE OR EXEMPT STATUS.
   The Department may deny or revoke an unaltered dog license or exempt status
for one or more of the following reasons.
   (A)   The pet owner is not in compliance with all of the requirements of §
6.01.160(A)(1).
   (B)   The Department has received at least one complaint, in writing, by a
complainant and verified by the Department, that the pet owner has allowed the
dog to run loose or escape.
   (C)   The pet owner was previously cited for violating a state law, county
code or other municipal provision relating to the care and control of animals.
   (D)   The unaltered dog has been adjudicated by a court or an agency of
appropriate jurisdiction to be potentially dangerous or vicious.
§ 6.01.190 ALLOCATION OF FEES COLLECTED.
   All fines and forfeited deposits collected under §
6.01.160 shall be paid to the Spay/Neuter Trust for the purpose of providing
assistance to the public in the spaying and neutering of dogs and cats.
(Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006; Ord. MC-1241, passed 3-6-2007)
CHAPTER 6.02: NOISY ANIMALS
Section
   
6.02.010   Findings
   
6.02.020   Declaration of a noisy animal as a public nuisance
   
6.02.030   Noisy animal warning notice
   
6.02.040   Fines and limits; appeal
   
6.02.050   Other penalties and violations
§ 6.02.010 FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council do find, determine and declare that the city has
become so closely built up with buildings occupied by human beings for business
and dwelling purposes, and has become so thickly populated that the keeping
therein of noisy animals has become injurious to health, offensive to the
senses and an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life and property by the entire community and
neighborhood, and by a considerable number of persons therein.
§ 6.02.020 DECLARATION OF A NOISY ANIMAL AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person owning, keeping, harboring or having in
his or her care or custody any dog or other animal to cause or permit to be
made or caused by such dog or other animal, barking or making of any noises or
other sounds, so as to annoy and become offensive to resident(s) in the
vicinity in which the dog or other animal is kept thereby disturbing the peace
of the neighborhood or causing excessive discomfort to any reasonable person(s)
of normal sensitivity residing in the area, unless such noise or sound is made
by an official police dog or fire dog while on duty.
   (B)   If, in violation of the provisions of division (A) above, any dog or
other animal persistently emits any noise or sound in such a manner as to annoy
and become offensive to resident(s) in the vicinity in which the dog or other
animal is kept, the Animal Control Division may notify the owner of the dog or
other animal by issuing a written warning notice advising the owner of a
possible public nuisance. If, within a period of seven days after the issuance
of such notice, the person owning, keeping, harboring or having in his or her
care or custody said dog or other animal has not abated the nuisance, such
person shall be liable to enforcement of the provisions of this title.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, after being informed in writing
pursuant to the provisions of division (B) above that his or her dog or other
animal may be declared a public nuisance, to fail, refuse or neglect to take
whatever steps or use whatever means are necessary to assure that such dog or
other animal does not again disturb residents in the vicinity in which the dog
or other animal is kept.
§ 6.02.030 NOISY ANIMAL WARNING NOTICE.
   When the City Animal Control Division is notified or alerted of a possible
noisy dog or other animal, the Animal Control Division may issue a noisy animal
warning notice. Such notice shall specify that the dog or other animal is in
possible violation of this municipal code and that the noisy dog or animal
nuisance must be abated to avoid further city action.
§ 6.02.040 FINES AND LIMITS; APPEAL.
   Any person who neglects or refuses to abate the condition within the time
specified in the noisy animal warning notice, or fails to request a hearing
before the hearing officer pursuant to the procedure established in §
6.14.080, is guilty of an infraction punishable under §
1.12.010. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the hearing officer may bring
an appeal to the Animal Control Commission by filing an appeal pursuant to the
procedure established in §
6.14.100 herein. The Animal Control Commission’s decision shall be made in
accordance with, and shall be subject to, all of the provisions of §
6.14.110 herein.
§ 6.02.050 OTHER PENALTIES AND VIOLATIONS.
   Nothing in the foregoing section shall be deemed to prevent the City
Attorney from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public
nuisance under other applicable law.
CHAPTER 6.03: KEEPING OF NON-EQUINE LIVESTOCK
Section
   
6.03.010   Findings
   
6.03.020   Bovine, ratite, caprine or ovine animals - not authorized on
property less than one acre
   
6.03.025   Bovine, ratite, caprine or ovine animals - on property greater than
one acre
   
6.03.030   Hogs, sow, gilt or boar
   
6.03.040   Rabbits and guinea pigs
§ 6.03.010 FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council do find, determine and declare that the city has
become so closely built up with buildings occupied by human beings for business
and dwelling purposes, and has become so thickly populated that the keeping
therein of livestock, wild, exotic, dangerous or non-domestic animals and
domestic fowl has become injurious to health, indecent, offensive to the senses
and an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life and property by the entire community and
neighborhood, and by a considerable number of persons therein.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 1003, passed 11-14-1923)
§ 6.03.020 BOVINE, RATITE, CAPRINE OR OVINE ANIMALS - NOT AUTHORIZED ON
PROPERTY LESS THAN ONE ACRE.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stable, pasture or
keep, or cause to be stabled, pastured or kept, any bovine (e.g., cow, steer),
ratite (e.g., ostrich, emu), caprine (e.g., goat) or ovine (e.g., sheep) animal
or like animal at a place which has an area of less than one acre (43,560
square feet).
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3465, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. MC-1214, passed
2-22-2006)
§ 6.03.025 BOVINE, RATITE, CAPRINE OR OVINE ANIMALS - ON PROPERTY GREATER THAN
ONE ACRE.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stable, pasture or
keep, or cause to be kept, more than four of any combination of ratite, bovine,
caprine or ovine at any place in the city; provided that a person, firm or
corporation having contiguous land of more than five acres may keep one
additional bovine, caprine or ovine for each acre in excess of such five acres,
but not to exceed 18 animals at any lot. Said animal(s) shall not be kept
within 150 feet of a building or structure used or intended for human occupancy
and said animal(s) shall not be kept within 50 feet of any neighboring property
line or street line.
(Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.03.030 HOGS, SOW, GILT OR BOAR.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep or cause to be
kept any hog, sow, gilt or boar at any place in the city.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3465, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. MC-418, passed
10-16-1984; Ord. MC-462, passed 5-21-1985)
§ 6.03.040 RABBITS AND GUINEA PIGS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep or cause to
be kept more than 12 rabbits or guinea pigs, or any combination of each
totaling 12, within 150 feet of any building or structure used or intended for
human occupancy.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep or cause to
be kept more than four rabbits or guinea pigs within 50 feet of any building or
structure used or intended for human occupancy.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3465, passed 12-17-1974)
CHAPTER 6.04: HORSES
Section
   
6.04.010   Definition
   
6.04.020   Equine stables - distance from human occupancies
   
6.04.030   Number of equine permitted in stable within city
   
6.04.040   Number of equine permitted on area between 20,000 square feet and
one acre
   
6.04.050   Stabling equine on property less than 20,000 square feet in size
   
6.04.060   Stabling of uncastrated equines
   
6.04.070   Removal of manure
   
6.04.080   Registration of horses
§ 6.04.010 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EQUINE. Any horse-like animal, including mules and burros.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3465, passed 12-17-1974)
§ 6.04.020 EQUINE STABLES - DISTANCE FROM HUMAN OCCUPANCIES.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stable, pasture or
keep, or cause to be stabled, pastured or kept, within 100 feet of a building
or structure used or intended for human occupancy any equine.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3465, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. MC-1264, passed
2-19-2008)
§ 6.04.030 NUMBER OF EQUINE PERMITTED IN STABLE WITHIN CITY.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stable, pasture or
keep, or cause to be stabled, pastured or kept, more than five equines at any
place in the city, except at approved riding stables or academies; provided
that a person, firm or corporation having contiguous land of more than five
acres may keep one additional equine for each acre in excess of such five
acres, but not to exceed 18 equines at any one place.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3465, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. 3582, passed 6-
21-1976)
§ 6.04.040 NUMBER OF EQUINE PERMITTED ON AREA BETWEEN 20,000 SQUARE FEET AND
ONE ACRE.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stable, pasture or
keep, or cause to be stabled, pastured or kept, more than three equines at a
place that has an area less than between 20,000 square feet and one acre.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3465, passed 12-17-1974)
§ 6.04.050 STABLING EQUINE ON PROPERTY LESS THAN 20,000 SQUARE FEET IN SIZE.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stable, pasture or
keep, or cause to be stabled, pastured or kept, any equine at a place which has
an area of less than 20,000 square feet or within ten feet of any adjoining
property not used for grazing, pasturing or stabling, or in any required front
yard area or in a side yard area of a corner lot.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3465, passed 12-17-1974)
§ 6.04.060 STABLING OF UNCASTRATED EQUINES.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stable, pasture or
keep, or cause to be stabled, pastured or kept, within 50 feet of any property
line any uncastrated equine. Any uncastrated equine so kept shall be confined
by an enclosure with a minimum height of six feet that is constructed in such a
manner as to prevent the animal’s escape.
§ 6.04.070 REMOVAL OF MANURE.
   Manure shall be removed from said place or premises every three days or
shall be spread at a place which has an area of 20,000 square feet or more in a
sanitary manner approved by the County Director of the Department of Public
Health (hereinafter referred to as “health officer”), his or her designated
deputy or any city employee designated by the Mayor and approved by the health
officer, or shall be maintained in an approved moisture and fly-proof manner.
It shall not be kept within 50 feet of any adjoining property line.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3465, passed 12-17-1974)
§ 6.04.080 REGISTRATION OF HORSES.
   Each person, firm or corporation who stables, pastures or keeps or causes or
permits the stabling, pasturing or keeping of any equine in the city shall
register in the Division of Animal Control, and shall provide data concerning
the number of equines, the location of such equines and such other relevant
information as said Division may require.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3465, passed 12-17-1974)
CHAPTER 6.05: FOWL
Section
   
6.05.010   Definition
   
6.05.020   Domestic fowl not permitted within 50 feet of human dwelling
   
6.05.030   Domestic fowl permitted if kept more than 50 feet away from human
dwelling
   
6.05.040   Roosters and peacocks not permitted within 200 feet of human
dwelling
   
6.05.050   Reserved
   
6.05.060   Domestic fowl at large
§ 6.05.010 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DOMESTIC FOWL. Any birds of the order Galliformes. This shall include
chickens, ducks, geese, turkey, pheasants and similar domesticated birds or
fowl.
§ 6.05.020 DOMESTIC FOWL NOT PERMITTED WITHIN FIFTY FEET OF HUMAN DWELLING.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, or cause to be
kept, or allow to roam any domestic fowl within 50 feet of any building or
structure used or intended for human occupancy.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3465, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. MC-217, passed
11-2-1982; Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.05.030 DOMESTIC FOWL PERMITTED IF KEPT MORE THAN 50 FEET AWAY FROM HUMAN
DWELLING.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, or cause to be
kept, or allowed to roam, more than two domestic fowls between 50 and 100 feet
of any building or structure used or intended for human occupancy. The maximum
number of domestic fowl on any lot is 24 fowl.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3465, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. MC-217, passed
11-2-1982; Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.05.040 ROOSTERS AND PEACOCKS NOT PERMITTED WITHIN 200 FEET OF HUMAN
DWELLING.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep any rooster or
peacock within 200 feet of any building or structure used or intended for human
occupancy. No more than one peacock or rooster is permitted per lot.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3465, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. MC-1214, passed
2-22-2006)
§ 6.05.050 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.05.060 DOMESTIC FOWL AT LARGE.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation having custody or control
of any domestic bird or fowl to permit such bird or fowl to be present upon any
public street, sidewalk, school ground, public park, playground or any public
place, or any unenclosed private property not owned or lawfully possessed by
such person, or upon any private property without the consent of the owner or
lawful possessor thereof.
CHAPTER 6.06: PIGEONS
Section
   
6.06.010   Definitions
   
6.06.020   Conditions
   
6.06.030   Permit
§ 6.06.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FANCY PIGEON. A pigeon which, through selective past breeding, has developed
certain distinctive physical and performing characteristics as to be clearly
identified and accepted as such by the National Pigeon Association, the
American Pigeon Club or the Rare Breeds Pigeon Club. Examples include, but are
not limited to, fantails, pouters and trumpeters.
   LOFT. The structure(s) for the keeping or housing of pigeons permitted by
this chapter.
   MATURE PIGEON. A pigeon aged six months or older.
   OWNER. The owner of pigeons subject to this chapter.
   PIGEON. A member of the family Columbidae, and shall include “racing
pigeons,” “fancy pigeons” and “sporting pigeons.”
   RACING PIGEON. A pigeon which, through selective past breeding, has
developed the distinctive physical and mental characteristics as to enable it
to return to its home after having been released a considerable distance
therefrom, and which is accepted as such by the American Racing Pigeon Union,
Inc. or the International Federation of Racing Pigeon Fanciers. This type of
pigeon may also be commonly known as RACING HOMER, HOMING PIGEON or CARRIER
PIGEON.
   SPORTING PIGEON. A pigeon which, through selective past breeding, has
developed the ability to fly in a distinctive manner, such as aerial acrobatics
or endurance flying. Examples include, but are not limited to, rollers and
tipplers.
§ 6.06.020 CONDITIONS.
   The keeping, breeding, maintenance and flying of pigeons shall be permitted
on the following conditions.
   (A)   The loft shall be of such sufficient size and design, and constructed
of such material, that it can be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (B)   There shall be at least one square foot of floor space for each mature
pigeon kept in any loft.
   (C)   The construction and location of the loft shall not conflict with the
requirements of any building code or zoning code of the city.
   (D)   All feed for said pigeons shall be stored in such containers as to
protect against intrusion by rodents and other pests.
   (E)   The loft shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and in compliance
with all applicable health regulations of the city.
   (F)   All pigeons shall be confined to the loft, except for limited periods
necessary for exercise, training and competition; and at no time shall pigeons
be allowed to perch or linger on the buildings or property of others.
   (G)   All pigeons shall be fed within the confines of the loft.
   (H)   No one shall release pigeons to fly for exercise, training or
competition except in compliance with the following rules.
      (1)   The owner of the pigeons must be a member in good standing of an
organized pigeon club, such as the American Racing Pigeon Union, Inc.; the
International Federation of Racing Pigeon Fanciers; the National Pigeon
Association; the American Tippler Society; the International Roller
Association; the Rare Breeds Pigeon Club; or a local club which has rules that
will help preserve the peace and tranquility of the neighborhood.
      (2)   Pigeons which have been fed within the previous four hours will not
be released for flying.
   (I)   Pigeons shall be banded and registered with one of the national pigeon
associations/registries.
§ 6.06.030 PERMIT.
   On application signed by the owner, on such a form as shall be provided by
the city, wherein the owner shall certify that his or her loft(s) comply with
applicable building and zoning codes, and upon payment of a fee as set by the
Mayor and City Council, a permit shall be issued to the owner, which shall
remain in full force and effect unless suspended or revoked, or unless the use
of the loft is discontinued for a period of one year. A condition of the permit
shall be that the animal control officer shall be granted permission to inspect
any property or loft at any reasonable time for the purpose of investigating
either an actual or suspected violation or to ascertain compliance or non-
compliance with this chapter. The animal control officer may report violators
to any local or nationally recognized pigeon club for the purposes of educating
and assisting any owner who is in violation of this chapter.
CHAPTER 6.07: WILD, EXOTIC, DANGEROUS OR NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS IN CAPTIVITY
Section
   
6.07.010   Definition
   
6.07.020   Animals prohibited
   
6.07.030   Reserved
   
6.07.040   Reserved
   
6.07.050   Reserved
   
6.07.060   Reserved
   
6.07.070   Reserved
   
6.07.080   Reserved
§ 6.07.010 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WILD, EXOTIC, DANGEROUS or NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Any animals not
specifically addressed within this title.
§ 6.07.020 ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall have, keep, maintain, breed, sell or trade any dangerous or
poisonous animal within the city limits. No person shall have, keep, maintain,
breed, sell or trade any wild, exotic or non-domestic animal that is prohibited
by applicable state and/or federal law within the city limits.
(Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.07.030 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.07.040 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.07.050 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.07.060 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.07.070 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.07.080 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
CHAPTER 6.08: DOGS
Section
   
6.08.010   Findings
   
6.08.020   Number of dogs permitted
   
6.08.030   License required
   
6.08.040   License and tag required - fees
   
6.08.050   License - application
   
6.08.060   License - issuance
   
6.08.070   Reserved
   
6.08.080   Applicability of chapter
   
6.08.090   Ban on the sale of research animals
   
6.08.100   Rabies vaccination required - certificates
   
6.08.110   Vaccination requirement
   
6.08.120   Exemption from rabies vaccination during illness
   
6.08.130   Running at large - impoundment
   
6.08.140   Running at large
   
6.08.145   Methods of restraint - improper restraint
   
6.08.150   Vaccination of other animals
   
6.08.160   Reporting of animal bites
   
6.08.170   Confinement or destruction of dogs and cats suspected of having
rabies
   
6.08.180   Confinement or destruction of dogs and cats which have bitten a
person
   
6.08.190   Confinement or destruction of other animals
   
6.08.200   Concealment or withholding of animals
   
6.08.210   Animals and vehicles
   
6.08.220   Animal bite
§ 6.08.010 FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find that local governments are required to adopt
policies for the protection of the public against rabies pursuant to the state
rabies control program and Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 121690. In order to
maintain compliance with relevant state and county requirements, the following
chapter is enacted.
§ 6.08.020 NUMBER OF DOGS PERMITTED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own, harbor or keep on
or at any lot, premises or place more than three dogs which are four or more
months of age, except as may be permitted by the provisions of Title 19.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 2926, passed 7-30-1968; Ord. 3613, passed 12-
20-1976; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 6.08.030 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own or harbor any dog
within the city, except as provided in this chapter, without securing a license
therefor, and maintaining a tag thereon, as specified in this chapter.
(Ord. MC-639, passed 9-22-1988)
§ 6.08.040 LICENSE AND TAG REQUIRED - FEES.
   (A)   Each person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or having custody
or control of a dog of the age of four months or more within the city shall
obtain at least annually a license and tag for the dog. License and tag fees
are payable in advance. If the appropriate fee is not paid when due, a
delinquency penalty shall be added to the fee. A fee shall be charged for any
additional tag issued to replace a lost, stolen, misplaced or damaged tag and
shall be charged for the transfer of ownership of a licensed dog to a new owner
in lieu of a fee for a new license for the remainder of the licensing period in
which the transfer occurs. If a dog has a current license from another
licensing jurisdiction and has a current rabies vaccination, said license shall
be recognized by the city upon a payment of a transfer fee.
   (B)   If any person, firm or corporation acquires the ownership, custody or
control of a dog, the new owner shall obtain the license required by this title
within 30 days after acquiring the ownership, custody or control of such dog,
if the dog is then of the age of four months or more, or within 30 days after
such dog attains the age of four months. The license shall expire the same
month as the month the rabies vaccination expires. The first license fee for a
dog may be prorated to expire at the same time as the rabies vaccination
expires.
   (C)   Monies received during the current year for a license shall be first
applied to the payment of delinquent fees, sums and penalties due during the
preceding year(s), and any balance remaining thereafter shall be applied to the
payment of the current license fees and penalties. A license issued during any
prior year to the same owner for license shall be prima facie evidence in any
court or administrative proceeding that the dog was continuously owned by the
same owner from the prior year to the current year.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3577, passed 6-7-1976; Ord. 3937, passed 5-12-
1980; Ord. MC-50, passed 5-7-1981; Ord. MC-363, passed 4-17-1984; Ord. MC-528,
passed 7-9-1986; Ord. MC-639, passed 9-22-1988; Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.08.050 LICENSE - APPLICATION.
   No license to own or harbor a dog, as provided in this chapter, shall be
issued except upon an application to authorized employees of the city setting
forth the name and address of the owner or possessor of the dog, a brief
description of the dog and proof of the vaccination of the dog to prevent
rabies.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3452, passed 10-30-1974)
§ 6.08.060 LICENSE - ISSUANCE.
   Authorized employees of the city, upon the receipt of such application and
the license fee aforesaid, shall issue and deliver to such owner or possessor a
license certifying the payment of the license fee, and setting forth the name
and address of the applicant and a brief description of the dog, and the number
allotted to such dog, and, upon receipt of the requisite fees, shall deliver to
the applicant a tag which shall set forth the date of the license, and the
number allotted to such dog, which tag shall at all times be affixed to the
collar, harness or other article worn by such dog; provided, however, that no
license for a dog shall be issued unless the owner shall have paid the license
fee required therefor and shall have exhibited to authorized employees of the
city a certificate of the vaccination of the dog to prevent rabies, signed by a
duly licensed veterinarian.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 1482, passed 10-20-1931; Ord. 3307, passed 11-
9-1972)
§ 6.08.070 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.08.080 APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall not be applicable to dogs under the age of four months,
and which are kept within enclosures and are not permitted to run at large.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 2561, passed 3-3-1964)
§ 6.08.090 BAN ON THE SALE OF RESEARCH ANIMALS.
   The city shall not sell, for research purposes, any animal to any person or
organization.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3185, passed 7-13-1971; Ord. 3803, passed 2-8-
1979; Ord. 3827, passed 5-22-1979; Ord. 3965, passed 9-10-1980; Ord. MC-50,
passed 5-7-1981; Ord. MC-88, passed 8-4-1981; Ord. MC-145, passed 3-16-1982;
Ord. MC-266, passed 4-21-1983)
§ 6.08.100 RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED - CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Every person, firm or corporation who owns, harbors, keeps or
possesses, or has in his or her care, charge, custody or control, any dog over
four months of age shall cause such dog to be vaccinated against rabies by or
under the direction of any duly licensed veterinarian, with a rabies vaccine
approved by the State Department of Health Services for use in dogs. Such
vaccinations shall be repeated at intervals specified by the State Department
of Health Services in order to maintain adequate immunity. Compliance with the
rabies vaccination provisions shall be a condition to the issuance or renewal
of a dog license.
   (B)   Each duly licensed veterinarian who vaccinates or causes or directs to
be vaccinated any animal with a rabies vaccine shall complete and sign a rabies
certificate in triplicate. The veterinarian shall keep one copy and shall give
one copy to the owner or keeper of the vaccinated animal. The veterinarian
shall submit to animal control a legible copy of each certificate within five
days of the beginning of each month, for any animal so vaccinated during the
previous month.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 2561, passed 3-3-1964; Ord. MC-639, passed 9-
22-1988; Ord. MC-833, passed 5-19-1992)
§ 6.08.110 VACCINATION REQUIREMENT.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own or harbor any dog
that has not been vaccinated as required by, and in the manner set forth in, §
6.08.100.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 2171, passed 5-13-1957; Ord. 3465, passed 12-
17-1974; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-639, passed 9-22-1988)
§ 6.08.120 EXEMPTION FROM RABIES VACCINATION DURING ILLNESS.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a dog need not be
vaccinated for rabies during an illness if a licensed veterinarian has examined
the dog and certified in writing that such vaccination should be postponed
because of a specified illness or condition. Old age, debility and pregnancy
are not considered contraindications to rabies vaccination. Exemption
certificates are subject to approval of the Animal Control Division and shall
be valid only for the duration of the illness. Exemption from vaccination does
not exempt the dog from the licensing requirement.
(Ord. MC-833, passed 5-19-1992)
§ 6.08.130 RUNNING AT LARGE - IMPOUNDMENT.
   The animal control officer, or authorized city employee, shall impound, for
a period of time as prescribed by state law, any dog found running at large or
unrestrained in the city. If any person does not provide proof of the owner’s
identity or satisfactory proof of ownership and claim the dog and pay any sums
due, including outstanding fines or fees for violations of this title, license
fees or fees set by the Mayor and City Council, prior to the expiration of the
period prescribed by state law, the dog shall become the property of the city
and may be disposed of by authorized employees of the city.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3452, passed 10-30-1974; Ord. MC-50, passed 5-
7-1981; Ord. MC-528, passed 7-9-1986; Ord. MC-625, passed 5-4-1988)
§ 6.08.140 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   Persons owning, having control or custody of any dog or other animal
shall, at all times, keep the animal on a leash (except in an authorized off-
leash dog park) or secured by the other suitable means of restraint or confined
by a fence on their property or the private property of another, with the
permission of the owner of that property, so as to prevent the animal from
being at large, biting or harassing any person engaged in a lawful act,
interfering with the use of public property or with the use of another person’s
private property or being in violation of any other section of this title.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Any dog used by a law enforcement agency;
      (2)   Any dog while participating in a formal dog obedience training
program or any dog participating in a dog show or other program expressly
permitted or sponsored by the city; and
      (3)   Any dog within a posted off-leash area in any city park, as
established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council; provided, however,
that nothing herein shall relieve the owner or person having charge, custody,
care and/or control of such dog from the responsibility to maintain proper
control over the dog nor shall this division (B)(3) be construed as relieving
such person from any liability for any damages arising out of his or her use of
an off-leash area.
   (C)   In order to be subject to the exemption set forth in division (B)(3)
above, all persons must comply with all requirements of law and the following
rules and regulations when utilizing any off-leash area.
      (1)   No dog is permitted in an off-leash area except when in the care,
custody and control of a person at least 13 years old. Any person under 13
years of age must be accompanied by, and be under the direct supervision of, an
adult. No person may have more than two dogs in an off-leash area at any one
time. No dogs are permitted in the off-leash area except during posted hours of
operation.
      (2)   All dogs must be at least four months of age, vaccinated for rabies
and currently licensed by the City Animal Control Division. No dog that is
sick, in heat, injured or less than four months of age, or which displays
aggressive behavior towards other dogs or humans is permitted in any off-leash
area.
      (3)   Any person having care, custody or control of a dog in an off-leash
area shall quiet or remove the dog if it barks and shall promptly remove and
properly dispose of any waste deposited by such dog.
      (4)   No animals other than dogs are permitted in any off-leash area.
      (5)   The designated hours of use for the off-leash area shall coincide
with the regular hours of the park as designated by §
12.68.020.
      (6)   As a condition of admission to an off-leash area, the owner or
person in custody of the dog shall carry a suitable container or instrument for
the removal and disposal of dog feces.
      (7)   Any person having care, custody or control of a dog in the off-
leash area must have, in his or her possession, a leash for such dog which
shall be worn by the dog at all times the dog is not in the off-leash area.
      (8)   All persons will otherwise comply with all rules governing city
parks and all relevant parking regulations.
      (9)   The use of an off-leash area by any dog shall constitute consent of
the dog’s owner, or any person having the care, custody or control of the dog,
to strictly follow the rules in §
6.08.140 and shall constitute a waiver of liability to the city, its elected
officials, officers and employees; an assumption of all risks; and an agreement
and undertaking to protect, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its
elected officials, officers and employees, for any injury or damage to persons
or property during any time that the dog is in the off-leash area.
   (D)   Any person violating any provisions of this section, including, but
not limited to, violation of any rules applicable to use of off-leash areas,
shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable as set forth in
Chapter 1.12.
   (E)   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by
means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other
manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.
(Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.08.145 METHODS OF RESTRAINT - IMPROPER RESTRAINT.
   (A)   Any person walking a dog on a leash on public property, including
sidewalks, and the private property of others, must keep the dog on a leash and
under physical control being able to restrain the movement of the dog with the
leash at all times. The leash must be kept in good condition, of sufficient
strength to prevent breaking under pressure and of material generally resistant
to chewing or gnawing by an animal. The leash must be of a length to control
the dog from harassing pedestrians or other animals at all times.
   (B)   (1)   Fencing must be adequate in terms of size to the number of dog
(s) contained in the fenced area to prevent the dog(s) from escaping, of
recognized construction methods and in compliance with all other sections of
the municipal code. Gates must be properly secured by a latching or locking
mechanism and the height and condition of the fence must be able to prevent the
dog(s) from escaping.
      (2)   A fence should be at least two and one-half times the height of the
dog’s shoulder when the dog is standing on four legs and be in compliance with
all other sections of the municipal code. However, should a dog be able to
escape from a fenced yard, either by climbing, jumping or digging, additional
fencing height, kennels or other restraint methods may be required in addition
to fencing. Fencing must be maintained in continued good condition. Existing
fencing regardless of height will be considered an acceptable means of
restraint unless and until a written complaint is filed with the Division of
Animal Control and evaluated, or if fencing allows dogs to reach over and
harass people on adjacent private property or people on the public right-of-
way.
   (C)   Invisible fencing may be used as an alternative to traditional fencing
as long as the system is installed by an authorized dealer of such products and
set up and maintained in the following manner:
      (1)   The owner and handler of the dog receive training regarding the use
and maintenance of said system;
      (2)   The owner or handler must post signs visible from the public
streets or driveways sufficient to alert the general public upon approaching
the property where the fencing is located; and
      (3)   Two signs are required stating that the “Dog is confined by
electronic device;” the name, address and telephone number of the company; any
trademark and/or logo of either the company that installed the system or the
company that maintains the system. Signs shall be at least six inches by eight
inches and be displayed in a prominent and visible location.
   (D)   Dog kennels must be tall enough to prevent the dog(s) from jumping
over, or have a secure top, and must be able to prevent dog(s) from digging
out. Kennels must have a minimum of 100 square feet for one dog, plus an
additional 25 square feet for each additional dog in the same enclosure.
   (E)   Cable runs are authorized as an alternative to fencing or kennel runs.
Cable runs must allow the animal freedom of motion to move about at will within
a protected area on the property without becoming tangled in obstacles. The
cable runs shall be located in the yard area so as to prevent the dog from
traversing upon another person’s property, public sidewalks or public property,
and from charging and harassing persons and pedestrians utilizing these
properties. Cables must be sized according to the manufacturer’s specifications
for the weight of the animal.
   (F)   Tie-outs must be of sufficient length to allow the animal freedom of
movement without becoming tangled, but never less than eight feet in length,
excluding the length of the collar. Tie-outs must be made of a non-rigid
material. Tie-outs shall not be the primary means of restraint and no animal
shall be kept in this manner for more than three hours a day.
   (G)   It is unlawful to use a weighted chain collar as a method of
restraint.
   (H)   No person shall use a dog as a weapon or to threaten or harass other
person(s) or animal(s), or keep a dog in such a manner wherein the dog charges
a fence, leaps up and reaches across the fence in an assaultive manner to a
pedestrian on public property or a neighbor legally on private property.
   (I)   If a dog is found running at large by the city animal control, the
incident shall constitute prima facie evidence that current restraint methods
are inadequate, and the owner shall be required to correct any conditions that
permitted the dog to run at large, and provide such additional restraints as
are necessary to secure and maintain the future restraint of the dog.
(Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006; Ord. MC-1264, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 6.08.150 VACCINATION OF OTHER ANIMALS.
   (A)   The same vaccination procedure and exemption shall apply to other
animals if the Director of Animal Control or designated officer shall deem this
prudent to ensure the safety of the public based on the recommendations of the
State Department of Health Services.
   (B)   Animals shall be vaccinated against rabies with a vaccine currently
licensed for use in such animal(s) in the United States and approved for use in
such animal by the State Department of Health Services.
(Ord. MC-833, passed 5-19-1992)
§ 6.08.160 REPORTING OF ANIMAL BITES.
   (A)   Any person having knowledge of an animal bite to a human being shall
report such bite to the Animal Control Division immediately.
   (B)   An owner or custodian of any dog or cat which is known to have been
bitten by or having contact with a rabid animal or by an animal suspected of
having rabies shall immediately notify the Animal Control Division.
(Ord. MC-833, passed 5-19-1992)
§ 6.08.170 CONFINEMENT OR DESTRUCTION OF DOGS AND CATS SUSPECTED OF HAVING
RABIES.
   (A)   Any dog or cat found within the city reasonably suspected of having
rabies, having contact with a rabid or suspected rabid animal or exhibiting the
common symptoms of such disease shall be taken into custody immediately by the
animal control officer and confined in the city animal shelter or at a private
veterinarian establishment approved by the Director. The animal shall be kept
in solitary confinement for such time as recommended by the State Department of
Health Services to determine whether the animal is afflicted with rabies.
   (B)   At the time any such animal is impounded, an attempt shall be made to
discover whether the animal has been vaccinated previously against rabies. If
it is found that such animal has not been vaccinated effectively, then such
animal shall be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian after the last day of the
observation period described in division (A) above, unless the animal is
humanely destroyed pursuant to division (C) below.
   (C)   The animal control officer may cause to be humanely destroyed any dog
or cat which, in the opinion of a veterinarian or animal health technician, has
rabies, or is in need of confinement pursuant to division (A) above, but such
confinement is impossible or impractical. In such circumstance, the animal
control officer shall arrange to have the head of such dog or cat examined for
the purpose of confirming rabies. If the opinion of a veterinarian or animal
health technician is not reasonably obtainable, the officer may act on his or
her own opinion.
   (D)   All expenses incurred with the enforcement of the provisions of this
section shall be borne by the owner or custodian of the dog or cat.
(Ord. MC-833, passed 5-19-1992)
§ 6.08.180 CONFINEMENT OR DESTRUCTION OF DOGS AND CATS WHICH HAVE BITTEN A
PERSON.
   (A)   Every dog or cat which has bitten a person, or is suspected of having
bitten a person, shall be quarantined away from other animals for a period of
ten days from the date of the bite, or other period of time as determined by
the State Department of Health Services. The animal control officer may order
the animal quarantined at the shelter, at a private veterinarian clinic or at
the home of the owner, depending on the conditions of the bite, the severity of
the bite, previous bite history, the owner’s ability to satisfy quarantine
orders and whether or not local ordinances were in observance at the time of
the bite.
   (B)   If the animal does not have a current rabies vaccination, it shall not
be vaccinated until the end of the quarantine period.
   (C)   The animal control officer may cause to be humanely destroyed any dog
or cat when, in the opinion of a veterinarian or animal health technician, such
confinement as described in division (A) above is impossible or impractical. In
such cases, the animal control officer shall arrange to have the head of such
dog or cat examined for rabies. If the opinion of a veterinarian or animal
health technician is not reasonably obtainable, the officer may act on his or
her own opinion.
   (D)   All expenses incurred with the enforcement of the provisions of this
section shall be borne by the owner or custodian of the dog or cat.
(Ord. MC-833, passed 5-19-1992)
§ 6.08.190 CONFINEMENT OR DESTRUCTION OF OTHER ANIMALS.
   Any animal, other than a dog or cat, which has bitten a person, has had
contact with a rabid or suspected rabid animal, is reasonably suspected of
having rabies or exhibiting the common symptoms of rabies shall be confined for
quarantine purposes or destroyed in accordance with the recommendations of the
State Department of Health Services or the local health officer.
(Ord. MC-833, passed 5-19-1992)
§ 6.08.200 CONCEALMENT OR WITHHOLDING OF ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful to conceal, withhold or refuse to surrender any animal that
is suspected of being rabid, has been bitten by a rabid or suspected rabid
animal or that has bitten a person to prevent it from being confined or
destroyed in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. MC-833, passed 5-19-1992)
§ 6.08.210 ANIMALS AND VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall transport or carry, on any public highway or public
roadway, any dog(s) or other animal(s) in a motor vehicle, unless the animal is
safely enclosed within the vehicle or protected by a cap or container, cage or
other device that is adequately ventilated and that will prevent the dog(s) or
other animal(s) from falling from, being thrown from or jumping from the motor
vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall leave a dog or any other animal in an unattended
vehicle without adequate ventilation, or in such a manner as to subject the
animal to extreme temperatures which adversely affect the animal’s health or
welfare.
§ 6.08.220 ANIMAL BITE.
   No person shall fail to control or restrain an animal thereby allowing it to
bite a person or domestic animal on public property or lawfully on private
property. A BITE is defined as a puncture wound that breaks the skin.
(Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006; Ord. MC-1264, passed 2-19-2008)
CHAPTER 6.09: VICIOUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS
Section
   
6.09.010   Findings
   
6.09.020   Definitions
   
6.09.030   Hearing on declaration of dog as potentially dangerous or vicious
   
6.09.040   Determination and orders; notice; compliance
   
6.09.050   hearing officer’s decision final - notice
   
6.09.060   Seizure and impoundment pending hearing
   
6.09.070   Circumstances under which dogs may not be declared potentially
dangerous or vicious
   
6.09.080   Potentially dangerous designation maintained in registration records
   
6.09.090   Muzzling and vaccination
   
6.09.100   Keeping and controlling potentially dangerous dogs
   
6.09.110   Death, sale, transfer or permanent removal; notice
   
6.09.120   Posting property
   
6.09.130   Removal from list of potentially dangerous dogs
   
6.09.140   Keeping and controlling vicious dogs
   
6.09.150   Destruction; non-destruction, conditions; enclosures
   
6.09.160   Prohibition of owning, possessing, controlling or having custody
   
6.09.170   Fines and limits
   
6.09.180   Severability
§ 6.09.010 FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find that dogs that threaten or injure residents
of the city constitute a public safety threat and shall be controlled by the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1470, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 6.09.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within
the prior 36-month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive
action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the dog are
off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog;
      (2)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing a less
severe injury than as defined by “vicious dog” below;
      (3)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, attacks and inflicts a severe
injury on another domestic animal when off the property of the owner or keeper
of the dog or any dog when unprovoked, on two separate occasions in a 36-month
period, has bitten or injured a domestic animal when off the property of the
owner or keeper; and/or
      (4)   Any dog off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog, when
unprovoked, has killed a domestic animal.
   SEVERE INJURY. Any physical injury to a human being that results in muscle
tears or lacerations or requires multiple sutures or corrective surgery.
   VICIOUS DOG. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any dog seized under Cal. Penal Code, § 599aa and upon the
sustaining of a conviction of the owner or keeper under Cal. Penal Code, §
597.5(a);
      (2)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts
severe injury on or kills a human being; or
      (3)   Any dog previously determined to be, and currently listed as, a
potentially dangerous dog which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of
this determination, continues the behavior described in §
6.09.020 or is maintained in violation of §§
6.09.080,
6.09.090 or
6.09.100.
(Ord. MC-1264, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 6.09.030 HEARING ON DECLARATION OF DOG AS POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS.
   If an animal control officer or a law enforcement officer determines that
probable cause exists to believe a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, the
officer or his or her immediate supervisor may file a petition with the hearing
officer for a hearing, as provided in §
6.14.080, to determine whether or not the dog in question should be declared
potentially dangerous or vicious. Whenever possible, any complaint received
from a member of the public shall be sworn to and verified by the complainant
and attached to the petition. The Animal Control Division shall notify the
owner or keeper of the dog that a hearing will be held and that the owner or
keeper may present evidence at the hearing. The Animal Control Division shall
serve upon the owner or keeper of the dog the notice of the hearing and a copy
of the petition either personally or by first class mail with return receipt
requested. The hearing shall be open to the public and held not less than five
working days, nor more than 14 working days, after service of the notice upon
the owner or keeper of the dog. The hearing officer may admit all relevant
evidence, including incident reports and affidavits of witnesses, limit the
scope of discovery and may shorten the time to produce records or witnesses.
The hearing officer may decide all issues even if the owner or keeper fails to
appear at the hearing. The hearing officer may find, upon a preponderance of
the evidence, that the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious and make other
orders authorized by this chapter.
§ 6.09.040 DETERMINATION AND ORDERS; NOTICE; COMPLIANCE.
   After the hearing conducted pursuant to §
6.09.030, the owner or keeper of the dog shall be notified, either personally
or by first class mail, postage prepaid, in writing of the determination and
orders issued. If the hearing officer determines that the dog is potentially
dangerous or vicious, the owner or keeper shall comply with §§
6.09.080 through
6.09.140 within ten days after the date of the order or as specified by the
hearing officer.
§ 6.09.050 HEARING OFFICER’S DECISION FINAL - NOTICE.
   The written decision of the hearing officer shall be final, subject to the
right to judicial review of any aggrieved party pursuant to Cal. Food and
Agriculture Code, § 31622. The city shall cause notice of the hearing officer’s
decision to be served upon the owner of the dog either personally or by first
class mail, postage prepaid, forthwith upon issuance.
(Ord. MC-1470, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 6.09.060 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT PENDING HEARING.
   If the animal control officer or law enforcement officer determines that
probable cause exists to believe the dog in question poses an immediate threat
to public safety, or if the animal was previously declared potentially
dangerous or vicious and the owner is found to be in violation of the hearing
order or of any provisions of this chapter and probable cause exists to believe
the dog poses an immediate threat, he or she may seize and impound the dog
pending the hearings held pursuant to this chapter. If the dog is later
adjudicated potentially dangerous or vicious or if the owner is found to be in
violation of this chapter, the owner or keeper of the dog will be liable for
costs and expenses of impounding the dog. If the animal control officer
determines that the impoundment is not contrary to public safety, he or she
shall permit the animal to be confined in a city approved kennel or veterinary
facility at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. MC-1214, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 6.09.070 CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH DOGS MAY NOT BE DECLARED POTENTIALLY
DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS.
   (A)   The hearing officer may not declare a dog potentially dangerous or
vicious if the dog inflicted injury or damage to a person committing a willful
trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the
dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or was
committing or attempting to commit a crime.
   (B)   The dog may not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious if it was
protecting or defending a person within the dog’s immediate vicinity from an
unjustified attack or assault.
   (C)   A dog may not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious if the
injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal that was teasing,
tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog.
   (D)   A dog may not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious if the
injury or damage to a domestic animal was sustained while the dog was working
as a hunting dog, herding dog or predator control dog on the property of or
under the control of its owner or keeper, and the damage or injury was to a
type of domestic animal appropriate to the dog’s work.
§ 6.09.080 POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DESIGNATION MAINTAINED IN REGISTRATION
RECORDS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 6.08 regarding licensing and
vaccination, all potentially dangerous dogs shall be properly licensed and
vaccinated. A dog determined to be potentially dangerous will be so designated
in its registration records. The city may charge a potentially dangerous dog or
vicious dog fee in addition to the regular licensing fee to provide for the
increased costs of maintaining the records of the dog. Any fees regarding this
section shall be set by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-1470, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 6.09.090 MUZZLING AND VACCINATION.
   The hearing officer may, by order, require the muzzling of any dog owned or
harbored within the city that is found to be potentially dangerous or vicious,
and may specify the period of time during which such dog shall be so muzzled.
Any dogs running at large which are not vaccinated, or which are not muzzled,
pursuant to such order, shall be forthwith put to death by authorized employees
of the city. Such muzzling must not cause injury to the dog or interfere with
the animal’s vision, respiration or its ability to drink.
§ 6.09.100 KEEPING AND CONTROLLING POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
   The owner or keeper of a potentially dangerous dog must keep the dog indoors
or in a securely fenced enclosure from which the dog cannot escape and into
which children cannot trespass. A potentially dangerous dog may be off the
owner or keeper’s premises only if it is restrained by a substantial leash, not
to exceed six feet in length, and if it is under the direct physical control of
a responsible adult.
§ 6.09.110 DEATH, SALE, TRANSFER OR PERMANENT REMOVAL; NOTICE.
   The owner or keeper of a potentially dangerous dog must notify the Animal
Control Division if the potentially dangerous dog dies, is sold, transferred or
permanently removed from the city.
§ 6.09.120 POSTING PROPERTY.
   The hearing officer may order that the owner of a potentially dangerous or
vicious dog conspicuously post the property with warning signs where the
potentially dangerous or vicious dog is housed.
§ 6.09.130 REMOVAL FROM LIST OF POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
   Upon receipt of a petition from the dog owner, the hearing officer may
remove a dog from the list of potentially dangerous dogs if no additional
instances of behavior described in this chapter occur within a 36-month period
from the date of designation as a potentially dangerous dog.
§ 6.09.140 KEEPING AND CONTROLLING VICIOUS DOGS.
   The owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall maintain the dog pursuant to the
conditions imposed by §
6.01.060 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6.09.150 DESTRUCTION; NON-DESTRUCTION, CONDITIONS; ENCLOSURES.
   A vicious dog may be destroyed if the hearing officer determines that the
release of the dog would create a significant threat to the public health,
safety and welfare. If the hearing officer determines that the vicious dog
should not be destroyed, the hearing officer must impose conditions upon the
dog’s owner or keeper that will protect the public health, safety and welfare.
If one of the conditions is to require that the vicious dog be confined in an
enclosure, the enclosure must be designed in order to prevent the animal from
escaping and include a fence or structure suitable to prevent children from
entering.
§ 6.09.160 PROHIBITION OF OWNING, POSSESSING, CONTROLLING OR HAVING CUSTODY.
   The city may prohibit the owner of a vicious dog from owning, possessing,
controlling or having custody of any dog for a period of up to three years if
the hearing officer finds, after proceedings conducted under §§
6.09.030 through
6.09.050, that such ownership or possession would create a significant threat
to the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 6.09.170 FINES AND LIMITS.
   Any violation of this chapter involving a declared potentially dangerous dog
or a declared vicious dog shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.
§ 6.09.180 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this title or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions
or applications of the title which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and, to this end, the provisions of this title are
severable.
CHAPTER 6.10: CATS
Section
   
6.10.010   Findings
   
6.10.020   Number of cats permitted
   
6.10.030   Cat fancier permit
§ 6.10.010 FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council find that cat owners who allow their cat(s) to
cause a public nuisance shall be responsible for maintaining their cat(s) in
such a manner as to prevent their cat(s) from interfering with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property by the surrounding community.
§ 6.10.020 NUMBER OF CATS PERMITTED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own, harbor or keep on
or at any lot, premises or place more than five cats which are four or more
months of age, except as may be permitted by the provisions of Title 19 or as
may be permitted by this chapter.
§ 6.10.030 CAT FANCIER PERMIT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own, harbor or
care for more than five cats over the age of four months without obtaining a
fancier permit from the Division of Animal Control.
   (B)   The Division of Animal Control may issue a fancier permit under the
following conditions:
      (1)   All cats owned, harbored or cared for shall be kept in compliance
with §
6.01.060 and any sections of this title relating to cats;
      (2)   The fee, or fees, for a fancier permit shall be set by resolution
of the Mayor and City Council and shall be in addition to any other permits,
licenses or fees required by this title;
      (3)   The number of cats permitted per residence shall be based upon the
following criteria:
         (a)   Property up to 10,000 square feet: a maximum of ten cats;
         (b)   Property between 10,001 square feet and 15,000 square feet: a
maximum of 15 cats;
         (c)   Property between 15,001 square feet and 20,000 square feet: a
maximum of 20 cats;
         (d)   No property shall exceed 20 cats; and
         (e)   No person residing at the property where the permit is to be
issued may have two or more convictions of this title, any conviction of anti-
cruelty laws or any conviction of animal fighting laws that have occurred in
the 18-month period prior to the application for the permit.
      (4)   The animal control officer shall be admitted to enter and inspect
any property or premises, at any reasonable time, for the purpose of
investigating either an actual or suspected violation or to ascertain
compliance or non-compliance with this title or state animal law;
      (5)   Any violation of this title or any state animal law shall
constitute reasonable grounds for the revocation of a fancier permit; and
      (6)   Failure to pay fines associated with any animal violations, failure
to pay any associated permit fees, refusal of an inspection by an authorized
animal control officer or a conviction of animal cruelty laws shall constitute
reasonable grounds for the revocation of a fancier permit.
CHAPTER 6.11: QUARANTINE
Section
   
6.11.010   Skunks
§ 6.11.010 SKUNKS.
   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§ 121575 through 121635, and
as directed by, and in accordance with, the Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 17,
§ 2606.8, there is established a quarantine prohibiting in the city:
      (1)   The trapping or capture of skunks for pets;
      (2)   The trapping, capture, holding in captivity or breeding of skunks
for sale, barter, exchange or gift; and
      (3)   The transportation of all skunks from or into the city is
prohibited except by permit from the State Department of Health Services to
recognized zoological gardens or research institutions.
   (B)   This quarantine shall continue as long as skunk rabies remains a
problem in the state and until revoked by the county health officer.
   (C)   The county health officer is authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 2968, passed 1-21-1969; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-
15-1985)
CHAPTER 6.12: POLICE DOGS
Section
   
6.12.010   Interference with police dogs
§ 6.12.010 INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE DOGS.
   It is unlawful for any person, in a manner not otherwise prohibited by Cal.
Penal Code, § 597, to tease, harass, agitate, provoke, beat, kick, strike,
injure or in any way interfere with any dog being used by any police officer in
the performance of his or her official duties.
(Ord. MC-388, passed 7-11-1984)
CHAPTER 6.13: ENFORCEMENT - PENALTY
Section
   
6.13.010   Penalty for violation
   
6.13.020   General penalties
§ 6.13.010 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating or causing the violation of any
provision of this title is guilty of an infraction, unless otherwise stated,
which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions
of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 6.13.020 GENERAL PENALTIES.
   (A)   Violations generally. Each method of enforcement set forth is intended
to be mutually exclusive and does not prevent concurrent or consecutive methods
being used to achieve compliance against continuing violations. Each and every
day any such violation exists constitutes a separate offense.
   (B)   Administrative citation. If a police officer, animal control officer,
animal license checker or any person designated by
Chapter 9.90 to enforce the various provisions of this title believes that a
violation exists, he or she may issue an administrative citation under the
provisions of
Chapter 6.14. Payment of any fine or service of a jail sentence shall not
relieve a person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity from the
responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation.
CHAPTER 6.14: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Section
   
6.14.010   Legislative findings; statement of purpose
   
6.14.020   Definitions
   
6.14.030   Use of the administrative citation
   
6.14.040   Violation; authority; fines
   
6.14.050   Service procedures
   
6.14.060   Contents of citation
   
6.14.070   Satisfaction of the administrative citation
   
6.14.080   Request for hearing on an administrative citation
   
6.14.090   Failure to pay fines
   
6.14.100   Hearing officer’s decision final - notice
   
6.14.110   Severability
   
6.14.115   Reserved
§ 6.14.010 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS; STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council find that there is a need for an
alternative method of enforcement for certain violations of Title 6 and
applicable state codes. The Mayor and City Council further find that an
appropriate alternative method of enforcement for animal control violations is
an administrative citation program, as authorized by Cal. Gov’t Code, §
53069.4, which is consistent with the city’s authority as a charter city.
   (B)   The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to
criminal, civil or any other legal remedy established by law, which may be
pursued to address violations of Title 6 or applicable state codes.
   (C)   It is the desire of the Mayor and City Council to secure compliance
with Title 6. Such compliance is a matter of local concern and serves an
important public purpose.
   (D)   Adoption of an administrative citation program will achieve the
following goals:
      (1)   To protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the city;
      (2)   To gain compliance with Title 6 in a timely and efficient manner;
      (3)   To provide for an administrative procedure to request a hearing on
the imposition of administrative citations and fines; and
      (4)   To provide an additional method to hold parties responsible when
they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of Title 6.
(Ord. MC-1469, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 6.14.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER or OTHER AUTHORIZED OFFICER. Any officer or employee
with the authority to enforce Title 6 of the municipal code as provided in
Chapter 9.90.
   APPLICANT. Any responsible person who requests a hearing pursuant to §
6.14.080 herein.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any person who causes a violation of Title 6 to occur;
      (2)   Any person who maintains or allows an animal violation to continue
by his or her acts or failure to act; and/or
      (3)   Any person described below whose agent or employee causes or
permits a violation to exist or to continue to exist by his or her acts or
failure to act:
         (a)   A person who is the owner and/or a person who is a lessee or
sub-lessee with the current right of possession of real property where an
animal related violation occurs; or
         (b)   A person who is the on-site manager of a business and is
responsible for the activities on such premises.
§ 6.14.030 USE OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   (A)   Use of the administrative citation is limited to violations of Title
6.
   (B)   The procedures established in this section shall be in addition to any
criminal, civil or any other legal remedy established by law which may be
pursued to address violations of Title 6. The use of the administrative
citation in place of other remedies shall be subject to the approval of the
office of the City Attorney. Issuance of an administrative citation shall not
be deemed a waiver of any other enforcement remedies found within this code.
§ 6.14.040 VIOLATION; AUTHORITY; FINES.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of Title 6 may be issued an
administrative citation by an animal control officer, or other authorized
officer, as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Each and every day a violation of any provision of Title 6 exists
constitutes a separate and distinct offense. Each section of Title 6 violated
constitutes a separate and distinct violation.
   (C)   Any fine assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the
animal control officer, or other authorized officer, shall be payable directly
to the city.
   (D)   Any person who receives an administrative citation shall be required
to pay a fine in the following amounts:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the first administrative citation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second administrative citation for
violation of the same ordinance if issued within a 12-month period; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $500 for any subsequent issued administrative
citation for violation of the same ordinance within a 12-month period.
§ 6.14.050 SERVICE PROCEDURES.
   In any case where an administrative citation is issued, service of the
citation shall be made by complying with the following.
   (A)   Personal service. The animal control officer, or other authorized
officer, shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person
and obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative
citation. If the responsible person refuses or fails to sign the administrative
citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the
administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings; or if the responsible
person cannot be contacted and personally served after reasonable efforts to do
so have failed, service may be effected by certified mail.
   (B)   Mail and posting. The responsible person shall be served by certified
mail, return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the citation shall be sent by
first class mail. If the citation is sent by certified mail and returned
unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail;
provided the citation sent by first class mail is not returned.
§ 6.14.060 CONTENTS OF CITATION.
   (A)   Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Date, approximate time and address or definite description of the
location where the violation(s) was/were observed;
      (2)   The Title 6 code section(s) violated and a description of the
violation(s);
      (3)   The amount of the fine for the violation(s);
      (4)   An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by
which it shall be paid;
      (5)   Identification of rights to a hearing, including the time within
which the hearing may be requested;
      (6)   The name and signature of the animal control officer, or other
authorized officer, issuing the citation; and
      (7)   A schedule of late fees.
   (B)   If the violation is one which is continuing, a notice to correct the
violation and an explanation of the consequences for failing to correct the
violation shall be issued concurrently with the citation.
§ 6.14.070 SATISFACTION OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person must:
   (A)   Pay the fine to the city within 15 days from the issue date of the
administrative citation. All fines assessed shall be payable to the city.
Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the
violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city; or
   (B)   File a request for hearing pursuant to §
6.14.080.
§ 6.14.080 REQUEST FOR HEARING ON AN ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   (A)   Time to file a request for hearing. Any recipient of an administrative
citation may contest the citation by completing a request for hearing form and
returning it to the City Clerk within 15 days from the date the citation is
served or deemed to have been served. A failure to file a timely request for
hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing on the citation and
a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
   (B)   Hearing officer. The hearing officer shall be a neutral contracted by
the city to hear such matters.
   (C)   Hearing procedure.
      (1)   No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing
officer shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form has been
completed and submitted within the time limits set forth above.
      (2)   After receipt of the request for hearing form, a hearing before the
hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than 15, and not more
than 60, days from the date that the request for a hearing is filed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The applicant shall be notified
of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date
of the hearing.
      (3)   The applicant shall be given the opportunity to testify and present
evidence concerning the administrative citation.
      (4)   Formal rules of evidence shall not apply.
   (D)   The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by
the animal control officer, or other authorized officer, shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents.
   (E)   If the animal control officer, or other authorized officer, submits an
additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing
officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall
be served by mail on the person requesting the hearing at least ten days prior
to the date of the hearing.
   (F)   At least ten days prior to the hearing, the recipient of an
administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the reports and other
documents submitted or relied upon by the animal control officer, or other
authorized officer. The hearing shall not be conducted according to formal
rules of evidence or procedure, but shall be conducted in a manner generally
consistent with the Administrative Procedure Act, Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 11370 et
seq.
   (G)   The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional
information from the issuing animal control officer, or other authorized
officer, or the recipient of the administrative citation, prior to issuing
findings of fact and statement of decision.
   (H)   Any person who has filed a “request for hearing” and has been notified
of the time and date for a hearing pursuant to this chapter who does not appear
at said hearing and does not seek a continuance prior to the hearing shall be
deemed to have waived the right to be present at the hearing, and the hearing
shall proceed in their absence.
   (I)   After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, the hearing officer may immediately issue a verbal decision or may
issue a written decision within ten working days of the hearing. The decision
shall include the reasons therefor and the amount of any fine imposed. Said
decision shall also include any conditions pertaining to the correction of the
violation(s) and any time limits set for said corrections. If a verbal decision
is issued at the hearing, a written decision shall be prepared by the hearing
officer and mailed to the applicant within ten working days of the hearing. The
effective date of the decision shall be the mailing date of the written
decision to the applicant.
(Ord. MC-1469, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 6.14.090 FAILURE TO PAY FINES.
   (A)   Failure of any person to pay a fine assessed by administrative
citation within the time specified on the citation, or designated by the
hearing officer as a result of a hearing, shall result in an assessment of an
additional late fee in accordance with the following late fee schedule.
      (1)   Failure to pay the administrative citation, if no appeal is filed,
within 15 days after the date the citation was issued by an officer shall
result in a $25 late penalty assessed.
      (2)   Any fines and late fees which remain outstanding, when no appeal is
filed, 30 days beyond the date the citation was issued by an officer shall have
assessed an additional $25 late penalty, for a total of a $50 late fee.
   (B)   The failure of any person to pay an administrative fine within the
time frames specified on the citation, or upon the hearing as ordered by the
hearing officer, shall be considered a debt to the city. To enforce that debt,
the Director of Animal Control may file a small claims action or pursue any
other legal remedy to collect such money. The city may also recover its
collection costs, along with fines assessed, as established by proof of the
cost of attempts to collect the debt.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to abide by any decision
of the hearing officer.
§ 6.14.100 HEARING OFFICER’S DECISION FINAL - NOTICE.
   The decision of the hearing officer shall be issued in writing and shall be
final, subject to the right to judicial review of any aggrieved party pursuant
to, by filing an appeal with the Superior Court of the State of California,
County of San Bernardino, in accordance with the time lines and provisions set
forth in Cal. Gov’t Code, § 53069.4.
(Ord. MC-1469, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 6.14.110 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable, and, if any sentence, section,
phrase, word or other part of the title should be found to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions, and the remaining
provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. MC-1469, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 6.14.115 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1469, passed 3-7-2018)
TITLE 7: RESERVED
[Reserved]
TITLE 8: HEALTH AND SAFETY
   Chapter
      
8.01.   ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH CODE (“EHC”)
      
8.02.   INSPECTION GRADING OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
      
8.03.   APIARIES
      
8.05.   COLLECTION OF RENT FOR BUILDINGS ORDERED VACATED
      
8.06.   DISTRIBUTION OF MEDICINE, PILLS OR DRUGS
      
8.07.   RESERVED
      
8.09.   TREATMENT OF WOUNDED PERSONS
      
8.12.   RESERVED
      
8.14.   YARD SALES
      
8.15.   LITTER
      
8.18.   ACCUMULATION OF COMBUSTIBLE AND NON-COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS
      
8.19.   ABATEMENT OF FIRE HAZARDS AND HAZARDOUS TREES
      
8.21.   RESERVED
      
8.24.   SOLID WASTE COLLECTION, REMOVAL, DISPOSAL, PROCESSING AND RECYCLING
      
8.24.5.   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE RECYCLING PROGRAM
      
8.25.   SCRAP TIRES
      
8.27.   NUISANCES
      
8.30.   PUBLIC NUISANCES
      
8.33.   RESERVED
      
8.35.   RESERVED
      
8.36.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
      
8.38.   SIGNS ON VACANT PROPERTIES
      
8.39.   SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF NUISANCE VEHICLES
      
8.42.   RESERVED
      
8.45.   RESERVED
      
8.48.   HOTELS AND LODGING HOUSES
      
8.50.   VENEREAL DISEASES
      
8.51.   MUFFLERS
      
8.54.   NOISE CONTROL
      
8.57.   SOUND VEHICLES
      
8.60.   FIREWORKS
      
8.61.   PROHIBITED FIREWORKS
      
8.63.   EXPLOSIVES AND FIRES
      
8.65.   DESTRUCTION OF WEAPONS
      
8.66.   MOVING OF BUILDINGS AND OVERSIZE LOADS
      
8.68.   ETCHING CREAM, AEROSOL CONTAINERS AND CERTAIN MARKER PENS
      
8.69.   GRAFFITI
      
8.72.   RESERVED
      
8.73.   NO SMOKING IN PARKS
      
8.75.   RESERVED
      
8.78.   AUTOMATIC DIALING AND TAPED MESSAGE ALARM SYSTEMS
      
8.79.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
8.80.   STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
      
8.81.   SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS
      
8.82.   ESTABLISHMENT OF EXTRAORDINARY LAW ENFORCEMENT SERVICES
      
8.83.   SOCIAL HOST ACCOUNTABILITY
      
8.84.   CASTOR BEAN PLANTS
      
8.87.   RAILROAD COMPANIES
      
8.90.   MOBILE HOME RENTS
      
8.93.   BICYCLES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PUBLIC BUILDINGS
      
8.95.   ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN CITY BUILDINGS
      
8.97.   SMOKING CANNABIS IN PUBLIC PLACES
      
8.99.   PERSONAL CULTIVATION OF CANNABIS
CHAPTER 8.01: ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH CODE (“EHC”)
Section
   
8.01.010   Purpose
   
8.01.020   Exceptions to adopted code
   
8.01.030   Remedies/penalties
§ 8.01.010 PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§ 101025 et seq., 101275 et seq.,
101310, 101375 et seq., 101450 et seq. and 120125 et seq.; Cal. Public
Resources Code, §§ 21050 et seq. (Environmental Quality Act of 1970); Title 17
of the Cal. Code of Regulations; and other relevant state law, for the
protection of the environmental public health, the issuance of permits and
collection of fees and providing penalties and remedies for the violation of
such regulations, there is adopted by the city, as its Environmental Health
Code, that certain code known as the Uniform Environmental Health Code, being
Chapters 1 through 11, Division 3, Title III of the San Bernardino County Code,
except as provided in §
8.01.020. This code also specifically adopts the “Regulatory References for
Underground Storage Tanks,” including Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 23,
Division 3, Chapter 16, Article 7, §§ 2670 through 2671; Cal. Health and Safety
Code, § 25298; and San Bernardino County Code, Title 2, Division 3, Article 2,
§§ 23.07210 through 23.07213. The city designates both the city, and any
employee thereof, and the County Department of Environmental Health Services
(“DEHS”) as the enforcement agencies for the purpose of this Environmental
Health Code and all state law pertaining to environmental health. Pursuant to
Cal. Gov’t Code, § 50022.6, a copy of said code is on file in the office of the
City Clerk and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein.
(Ord. MC-613, passed 12-21-1987; Ord. MC-1545, passed 10-7-2020)
§ 8.01.020 EXCEPTIONS TO ADOPTED CODE.
   The Environmental Health Code is amended, changed or deleted as follows.
   (A)   Chapter 8 - Article 1 - “Refuse Storage” is deleted.
   (B)   Chapter 8 - Article 2 - “Refuse Collection” is deleted.
   (C)   Chapter 8 - Article 6 - “Designated Maintenance Areas” is deleted.
(Ord. MC-613, passed 12-21-1987)
§ 8.01.030 REMEDIES/PENALTIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to deny access,
interfere with, prevent, restrict, obstruct or hinder either the city or the
Department of Environmental Health Services’ (“DEHS”) employees or agents
acting within the scope of their duty or agency. It shall be unlawful for any
person to fail to identify oneself upon lawful request by either the city or
the Department of Environmental Health Services (“DEHS”) employees or agents
acting within the scope of their duty or agency. Offering physical resistance
or bodily attack upon authorized representative of the city or DEHS acting
within the scope of his or her duty or agency is a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not less than ten days, without the
alternative of a fine.
   (B)   In addition to criminal prosecution, civil action and every other
remedy or penalty provided by law, public nuisance may be abated or enjoined in
an action brought by either the city or DEHS, or under circumstances
immediately dangerous to public health or safety, may be summarily abated by
either the city or DEHS enforcement officers as provided herein or otherwise in
the manner provided by law for the summary abatement of public nuisances.
   (C)   Except where punishable as a misdemeanor or felony under state law or
herein, any person or entity who violates any provision of this Environmental
Health Code (“EHC”) shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25 but not exceeding
$100 for a first violation, a fine not exceeding $200 for a second conviction
within one year and a fine not exceeding $500 for the third conviction within
one year, the fourth and additional convictions within one year shall be
punishable as misdemeanors and shall be punished by a fine not less than $250
nor more than $1,000, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding six months, or both, and such convicted person or entity may, in the
discretion of the court, be adjudged in addition to the above penalties, to be
liable to the city and/or DEHS for all necessary costs incurred in
investigation, discovery, analysis, inspection, clean-up and other actual costs
incurred by the city and/or DEHS or its agents pertaining to the violation.
   (D)   Each day or portion thereof in violation shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense. The owner, manager and operator of every
activity or facility subject to the jurisdiction of this EHC shall be
responsible for any violation by any employee of any of its provisions. Payment
of any penalty or serving any term of imprisonment herein provided shall not
relieve any person or entity from the responsibility of correcting the
condition constituting the violation.
   (E)   Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, any violation of this chapter
may be prosecuted by the City Attorney and be punishable as an infraction or a
misdemeanor in accordance with
Chapter 1.12.
(Ord. MC-613, passed 12-21-1987; Ord. MC-1545, passed 10-7-2020)
CHAPTER 8.02: INSPECTION GRADING OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
8.02.010   Adoption of the San Bernardino County Code
   
8.02.020   Administering agency designated
   
8.02.030   Schedule and collection of fees
   
8.02.040   Violations - penalty
   
Appendix A: Figures
§ 8.02.010 ADOPTION OF THE SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY CODE.
   (A)   The city adopts by reference, and makes a part of this chapter, San
Bernardino County Code, Chapter 14 of Division 3 of Title 3, entitled
“Inspection Grading of Food Establishments” (attached and incorporated herein
as Exhibit A), with the following exceptions (shown with additions underlined
and deletions lined-out):
      (1)   Section 33.1403, “Grading,” division (c) is amended to read as
follows:
(c)   Any food establishment that fails to attain at least a “B” grade, as
defined herein, shall be issued written notice, through an OIR, by the health
official. The food establishment must correct the deficiencies listed in the
OIR and must file a written request for a re-score inspection with the health
official within 30 days of the OIR. A re-score inspection shall be conducted by
the health official and be subject to a re-score inspection fee as provided in
the Code, Schedule of Fees. The health official will complete the re-score
inspection within ten (10) County business days of food establishment’s filing
of a written request for a re-score inspection. A food establishment failing to
comply with the OIR, or failing to attain at least a “B” grade on the re-score
inspection, may be immediately closed by the health official pursuant to State
law and remain closed until at least a “B” grade is achieved on a re-score
inspection. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the health official from
immediately closing any food establishment if, at his discretion, immediate
closure is necessary to protect the public health pursuant to State law.
      (2)   Section 33.1404, “Notice of Closure,” is amended to read as
follows:
“Notice of Closure” means a public notice that shall be posted by the health
official at a food establishment upon suspension or revocation of the food
establishment’s public health permit and that results in the closure of the
food establishment and the discontinuance of all operations of the food
establishment, by order of the health official, because of violations of
applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations relating to the
protection of public health. The Notice of Closure shall remain posted until
removed by the health official. Removal of the Notice of Closure by any person
other than the health official or the refusal of a food establishment to close
upon issuance of the written notice of suspension of the public health permit
is a violation of this Chapter and may result in the revocation of the food
establishment’s public health permit and shall be prosecuted by the City
Attorney and be punishable as a misdemeanor as specified in section 33.0112 of
this Code
Chapter 1.12 of the San Bernardino Municipal Code.
      (3)   Section 33.1406, “Posting Requirements - Penalty for Non-Compliance
- Documents Available for Public Review,” division (c) is amended to read as
follows:
(c)   The Letter Grade Card shall not be defaced, marred, camouflaged, hidden
or removed. It shall be unlawful to operate a food establishment unless the
Letter Grade Card is posted. Removal of the Letter Grade Card or any other
signs posted by the health official, is a violation of this Chapter and may
result in the suspension or revocation of the public health permit and shall be
prosecuted by the City Attorney and be punishable as an infraction or a
misdemeanor as specified in section 33.0112 of this Code
Chapter 1.12 of the San Bernardino Municipal Code.
   (B)   The aforementioned sections of the San Bernardino County Code, as
amended herein, are adopted as the inspection grading of food establishments
program for the city.
§ 8.02.020 ADMINISTERING AGENCY DESIGNATED.
   The County Department of Public Health is designated as the administering
agency for the city and is authorized to provide the qualified personnel
necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter.
§ 8.02.030 SCHEDULE AND COLLECTION OF FEES.
   The schedule of fees contained within the provisions of the County Code,
adopted herein, and as which may be modified in the future by the county, is
adopted as the fees in effect in the city, and shall be applicable within the
city to provide for the administration of this chapter. The county shall
administer and collect these fees for deposit with the County Treasurer to
offset the costs assumed by the county in administering this program.
§ 8.02.040 VIOLATIONS - PENALTY.
   Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, any violation of this chapter may
be punishable as an infraction or a misdemeanor in accordance with
Chapter 1.12.
(Ord. MC-1271, passed 5-21-2008)
APPENDIX A: FIGURES
Figure 1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7bb690b80ee5b92444942f82544ba748383751e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5945.png]
Figure 2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7bb690b80ee5b92444942f82544ba748383751e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5947.png]
Figure 3.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7bb690b80ee5b92444942f82544ba748383751e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5949.png]
CHAPTER 8.03: APIARIES
Section
   
8.03.010   Nuisance
   
8.03.020   Maintenance of more than two swarms unlawful
   
8.03.030   Violation - penalty
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on bees, see Cal. Food and Agricultural Code, §§ 29000 et
seq.
§ 8.03.010 NUISANCE.
   The Mayor and City Council do determine and declare that the maintenance of
apiaries and the keeping of bees in larger numbers than two stands or swarms
within the city has become and is dangerous to the inhabitants of the city, and
become and is an obstruction to the free use of property in the city, so as to
interfere with and prevent the comfortable enjoyment of life and property of a
considerable number of persons, residents of the city; and the maintenance of
apiaries and the keeping of bees in larger numbers than two stands or swarms at
any one place within the city is a public nuisance.
(Ord. 421, passed 9-13-1909)
§ 8.03.020 MAINTENANCE OF MORE THAN TWO SWARMS UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep or maintain an
apiary or keep or maintain more than two stands or swarms of bees at any one
place within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 421, passed 9-13-1909)
§ 8.03.030 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is
guilty of infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 421, passed 9-13-1909; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 8.05: COLLECTION OF RENT FOR BUILDINGS ORDERED VACATED
Section
   
8.05.010   Collection of rent
§ 8.05.010 COLLECTION OF RENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any property owner, landlord, manager or agent to
demand, accept, receive or retain any payment of rent if the building or
portion thereof for which the rent is paid has been ordered vacated by the
Building Official due to the existence of unsafe or dangerous building
conditions, unless a lease or rental agreement executed before the effective
date of the ordinance incorporated in this chapter provides otherwise, until a
new certificate of occupancy is issued.
(Ord. MC-804, passed 8-20-1991)
CHAPTER 8.06: DISTRIBUTION OF MEDICINE,
PILLS OR DRUGS
Section
   
8.06.010   Unlawful distribution
   
8.06.020   Violation - penalty
§ 8.06.010 UNLAWFUL DISTRIBUTION.
   It is unlawful for any person, persons, association or corporation, whether
as principal, officer, clerk, agent or employee, either for themselves or any
other person, persons, association or corporation or otherwise, to distribute
or place in any private place, or at or near any residence, or upon any private
doorstep, except in the hand of some adult person, any samples or patent
medicine, pills or drugs, either in bottle or boxes, or otherwise.
(Ord. 294, passed 11-17-1903)
§ 8.06.020 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Every person, association or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter is guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is
punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 294, passed 11-17-1903; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 8.07: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 8.09: TREATMENT OF WOUNDED PERSONS
Section
   
8.09.010   Notice to Chief of Police when
   
8.09.020   Failure to notify an infraction
§ 8.09.010 NOTICE TO CHIEF OF POLICE WHEN.
   Every physician, surgeon, osteopath or other person within the corporate
limits of the city who dresses or treats or prescribes for any wound of any
human being or human beings who has been wounded, which such wound may have
been caused or made by a sharp or blunt instrument or by a bullet or bullets
from a gun or pistol, shall immediately notify the Chief of Police or other
police officer of the city that he or she has so dressed, treated or prescribed
for such wound of a human being.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-21-16)
§ 8.09.020 FAILURE TO NOTIFY AN INFRACTION.
   Every such physician, surgeon, osteopath or other person who fails to so
notify the Chief of Police or other police officer of the city that he or she
has so dressed, treated or prescribed for such wound of a human being is guilty
of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance
with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-21-16; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 8.12: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 8.14: YARD SALES
Section
   
8.14.010   Definitions
   
8.14.020   Frequency, duration, hours and permissible dates
   
8.14.030   Display of personal property
   
8.14.040   Signs
   
8.14.050   Estate sale exemption
   
8.14.060   Non-profit organization exemption
   
8.14.070   Violation - penalty
§ 8.14.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Community  Development and Housing of the City
of San Bernardino.
   ESTATE SALE or ESTATE LIQUIDATION. A type of yard sale or auction to dispose
of a substantial portion of the materials owned by a person who is recently
deceased, or who must dispose of his or her personal property to facilitate a
move necessitated by the relocation of the owner due to advanced age or
disability and which sale is conducted by a person or entity that has legal
authority to make such sale.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Property which is owned, utilized or maintained by an
individual or members of a residence or family and acquired in the normal
course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include new
merchandise or merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on
consignment.
   RESIDENTIAL ZONE. Any residentially zoned property, as defined by the city’s
zoning ordinances, or property used for residential purposes as permitted by
the city’s Development Code, or premises zoned for another use, providing the
actual and principal current use of such premises is for residential purposes.
The definition includes both single-family and multiple-family residential.
   SELLER. Any of the following:
      (1)   The person authorized by the premises owner to sell the personal
property at the yard sale;
      (2)   The tenant of the premises where the yard sale is conducted; or
      (3)   The owner of the premises where the yard sale is conducted.
   YARD SALE. The offer of sale of personal property, open to the public,
conducted from or on a premises in any residential or commercial zone. The term
YARD SALE includes, but is not limited to, all sales entitled, advertised or
called “garage sale,” “lawn sale,” “yard sale,” “porch sale,” “patio sale,”
“estate sale,” “moving sale,” “flea market” or “rummage sale.”
(Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 8.14.020 FREQUENCY, DURATION, HOURS AND PERMISSIBLE DATES.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to the additional limitations imposed by division (B)
and (C) below, no yard sale shall be conducted by any seller or at any location
more frequently than 12 times in any calendar year.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, CALENDAR YEAR means the 12-month
period from January through December, inclusive.
   (B)   Yard sales may be conducted up to a maximum period of three
consecutive days.
   (C)   Yard sales may be conducted only during daylight hours.
   (D)   (1)   Yard sales shall only be conducted on the third weekend of each
month.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (D), the term WEEKEND means Friday,
Saturday and Sunday.
§ 8.14.030 DISPLAY OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   No items other than personal property may be sold at any yard sale. Personal
property may not be displayed in the public right-of-way, and all personal
property shall be arranged so that fire safety service and other officials may
have access for inspection at all times during the sale. Personal property may
only be displayed on the days of and between the hours of yard sales as
provided in this chapter.
§ 8.14.040 SIGNS.
   (A)   Three unlighted signs shall be permitted not exceeding four square
feet in area advertising such yard sale. Such signs shall be displayed only
during the period of the yard sale. The signs shall be permitted only on the
property where such yard sale is located. Such signs may be posted 24 hours
prior to the yard sale and must be removed immediately following the yard sale.
   (B)   Directional signs not larger than two square feet may be placed on
private property, provided the person conducting the yard sale has obtained the
prior consent from the owner or occupant of the premises where the directional
sign is placed. There shall be no more than four such directional signs erected
for any yard sale permitted pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   Any signage allowed by this section is prohibited on the public
rights-of-way.
§ 8.14.050 ESTATE SALE EXEMPTION.
   The child, survivor or heir of the owner of personal property, or a person
with legal authority over the personal property of another, who is the seller
at an estate sale of such personal property, and who attests that the estate
sale is necessitated by the relocation of the owner due to advanced age or
disability, or is necessitated by the death of the owner, shall not be subject
to the limitations of §
8.14.020(A) and (D) regarding the permissible dates on which such yard sale may
be conducted. The person(s) conducting such an estate sale shall be required to
obtain a permit and shall be subject to all other regulations established
herein.
§ 8.14.060 NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION EXEMPTION.
   Non-profit organizations shall not be subject to the limitations of §
8.14.020(A) and (D) regarding the permissible dates on which such yard sale may
be conducted provided that the sale is conducted on property owned or leased by
said non-profit organization.
§ 8.14.070 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates or causes violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor, which, upon
conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
   (B)   A violation of this chapter may be enforced or punished in any manner
prescribed by law or through any other process or procedure established or
allowed by this code or applicable law.
(Ord. MC-1339, passed 11-16-2010; Ord. MC-1344, passed 1-11-2011)
CHAPTER 8.15: LITTER
Section
   
8.15.010   Short title
   
8.15.020   Definitions
   
8.15.030   Litter in public places
   
8.15.040   Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering
   
8.15.050   Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited
   
8.15.060   Litter in parks
   
8.15.070   Throwing or distributing handbills in public places
   
8.15.080   Placing commercial and non-commercial handbills on vehicles
   
8.15.090   Depositing commercial and non-commercial handbills on uninhabited or
vacant premises
   
8.15.100   Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly posted
   
8.15.110   Distributing commercial and non-commercial handbills at inhabited
private premises
   
8.15.120   Dropping litter from aircraft
   
8.15.130   Posting notices prohibited
   
8.15.140   Litter on occupied private property
   
8.15.150   Owner to maintain premises free of litter
   
8.15.160   Litter on vacant lots
   
8.15.170   Violation - penalty
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on littering, see Cal. Penal Code, §§ 374, 374.3 and 374.4
§ 8.15.010 SHORT TITLE.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as
the “Anti-Litter Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966)
§ 8.15.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words
used in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed
for navigation or for flight in the air. AIRCRAFT shall include helicopters,
lighter-than-air powered craft and balloons.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino.
   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:
      (1)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing;
      (2)   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
      (3)   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause
shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up
for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held,
given or has taken place in connection with the dissemination of information
which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals,
public peace, safety and good order; provided that nothing contained in this
clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, without a
license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or
under any ordinance of this city; or
      (4)   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominately and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of
any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
   GARBAGE. Table refuse, swill and offal, and every accumulation of animal,
vegetable and other matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay or
dealing in or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruit and includes all animal and
vegetable refuse from kitchens and all household waste that has been prepared
from or intended to be used as food, or has resulted from the preparation of
food and also includes all vegetable trimmings from markets or stores. Articles
and things not hereinbefore enumerated are not included in the term GARBAGE:
dead animals over five pounds in weight, dish or wastewater, paper and other
combustible or inflammable material, crockery, glass, cans, tins, ashes, wire
and sweepings and like materials.
   LITTER. Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined in this section, and
including, but not limited to, animal excrement, and in addition, all other
waste material, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this chapter, which
tends to create a public nuisance.
   NEWSPAPER. Any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by general law,
any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States
in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in
addition thereto, means and includes any periodical or current magazine
regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the
public, and any current periodical or newspaper which has not been adjudicated
as a newspaper of general circulation pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, Title 1,
Division 7, Chapter 1, but which is nevertheless printed, published and
circulated at regular daily, weekly or monthly periods and which devotes at
least 15% of its printed matter to news subjects.
   NON-COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial
handbill or newspaper.
   PARK. Any public area, owned or used by the city, devoted to active or
passive recreation, including, but not limited to, a reservation, playground,
recreation center or any other public area in the city.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed
or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox
belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, residue from
street cleaning, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and
industrial wastes.
   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
non-combustible wastes, including, but not limited to, paper, wrapping,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, plastic, cloth,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966; Ord. 2747, passed 5-24-1966; Ord. MC-1194, passed
5-3-2005)
§ 8.15.030 LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter in or upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place within the city, except in public
receptacles or in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official
city dumps.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
Statutory reference:
   Definition of rubbish, see In re Pedrosian (1932) 124 Cal. App. 692, 694,
698
§ 8.15.040 PLACEMENT OF LITTER IN RECEPTACLES SO AS TO PREVENT SCATTERING.
   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966)
§ 8.15.050 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street
or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons
owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises
free of litter.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 8.15.060 LITTER IN PARKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter in any park within
the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will
be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are
not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 8.15.070 THROWING OR DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any commercial or non-
commercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place
within the city. It is unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or
sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it is
not unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city for
any person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof any
non-commercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 8.15.080 PLACING COMMERCIAL AND NON-COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any commercial or non-
commercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it is
lawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without
charge to the receiver thereof a non-commercial handbill to any occupant of a
vehicle who is willing to accept it.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 8.15.090 DEPOSITING COMMERCIAL AND NON-COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS ON UNINHABITED OR
VACANT PREMISES.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any commercial or non-
commercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 8.15.100 PROHIBITING DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS WHERE PROPERLY POSTED.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or distribute any commercial
or non-commercial handbill upon any private premises, if required by anyone
thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words “no trespassing,”
“no peddlers or agents,” “no advertisement” or any similar notice, indicating
in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested
or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left
upon such premises.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 8.15.110 DISTRIBUTING COMMERCIAL AND NON-COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS AT INHABITED
PRIVATE PREMISES.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or distribute any commercial
or non-commercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited,
except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner,
occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises;
provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not
posted, as provided in this chapter, such person, unless requested by anyone
upon such premises not to do so, shall have the authority to place or deposit
any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill
is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being
blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public
places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by
federal postal law or regulations. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to the distribution of mail by the United States or to newspapers.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 8.15.120 DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT.
   It is unlawful for any person in an aircraft to throw out, drop or deposit
any object within the city.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 8.15.130 POSTING NOTICES PROHIBITED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1343, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 8.15.140 LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter on any occupied
private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except
that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 8.15.150 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER.
   The owner or person in control of any private property shall, at all times,
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized receptacles for
collection.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966)
§ 8.15.160 LITTER ON VACANT LOTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter on any open or
vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 8.15.170 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating or causing or permitting the
violation of any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, which,
upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
   (B)   Any officer authorized by law to enforce the municipal code and any
person authorized by Chapter 9.90 may enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 2732, passed 4-5-1966; Ord. 3703, passed 2-9-1978; Ord. MC-254, passed 3-
9-1983; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1194, passed 5-3-2005)
CHAPTER 8.18: ACCUMULATION OF COMBUSTIBLE AND NON-COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS
Section
   
8.18.010   Nuisance determined - right of entry
   
8.18.020   Definitions
   
8.18.030   Notice to property owner - refusal of owner to comply - violation a
misdemeanor or an infraction
   
8.18.040   Contents of notice - appeal
   
8.18.050   Abatement of nuisance
   
8.18.060   Report of abatement costs
   
8.18.061   Recovery of attorneys’ fees and report of attorneys’ fees
   
8.18.062   Treble damages
   
8.18.063   Protest of abatement costs
   
8.18.065   Council action
   
8.18.066   Imposition of special assessment lien and notice
   
8.18.067   Record of nuisance abatement lien
   
8.18.068   Collection of costs and attorneys’ fees prior to hearing
   
8.18.070   Inventory of salvageable matter
   
8.18.080   Urgent public nuisance - notice to property owner
   
8.18.082   Summary abatement of nuisance per se without notice
   
8.18.090   Penalty for violation
Editor’s note:
   This chapter is amended by Ord. MC-1449, passed 11-1-2017.
Statutory reference:
   For provisions authorizing cities to compel property owners or occupants to
remove weeds and rubbish, see Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 39501 et seq.
§ 8.18.010 NUISANCE DETERMINED - RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   (1)   The accumulation of any of the following in any yard, lot or
upon any premises within the city except within buildings or in containers or
receptacles designed for such storage and accumulation is unlawful and a public
nuisance and dangerous to public health and safety of the inhabitants of the
city: rubbish, refuse, debris, waste material and other matter, including, but
not limited to, rocks; bricks; scrap metal and other pieces of metal, ferrous
and nonferrous; furniture or parts thereof; vegetation; cans; boxes; barrels;
bottles; stores of commercial supplies, and other matter whether usable or not;
straw; shavings; sacks; bags; litter; weeds; dry grass, dead trees or shrubs or
branches thereof; used lumber or wood; combustible waste; fragments of any
nature or kind; sawdust; excelsior; printed matter; paper; pasteboard;
cardboard; cardboard boxes; or crockery.
      (2)   No person, firm or corporation shall allow or permit the aforesaid
matter to accumulate or be upon his, her or its premises or upon premises
controlled by him, her or it except within buildings or in appropriate
containers or receptacles.
   (B)   The Fire Chief, or his or her authorized representative, hereinafter
called “Fire Chief,” or the Director of Community Development and Housing, and
his or her authorized representative, hereinafter called “Director,” shall have
the right to enter upon private property to determine whether such a public
nuisance exists.
(Ord. 3367, passed 8-22-1973; Ord. 3701, passed 1-24-1978; Ord. MC-241, passed
12-21-1982; Ord. MC-1449, passed 11-1-2017; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 8.18.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Community Development and Housing, and his or her
designated representatives.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection
District, and his or her designated representatives, within the San Bernardino
County Fire Protection District.
   NEGLECTED OR ABANDONED ORCHARD. An orchard, or part thereof, where trees, or
a substantial portion thereof, are in such a condition that the limbs are
moribund, with the leaves or branches of the limbs being dead and where the
individual in charge of the orchard is not taking such ordinary care of the
orchard as is required for a harvested orchard and is not or has not been
watering, discing or spraying such trees for a period of at least six months.
The six-month period of time need not be continuous. NEGLECTED OR ABANDONED
ORCHARDS in the city are places where the trees constitute a fire hazard, or
where vagrants or dissolute persons can dwell, and which constitute ugly and
unsightly conditions which adversely affect the neighboring properties, and are
places from which agricultural pests develop and spread. Such orchards are
public nuisances and dangerous to public health and safety, and shall be abated
as a public nuisance utilizing the methods and procedures hereinafter set forth
in this chapter.
   ORCHARD. Any ten or more trees that are of the type that bear stone fruits,
citrus fruits or pome fruits, situated together in a grove.
(Ord. 3367, passed 8-22-1973; Ord. 3518, passed 8-19-1975; Ord. MC-1449, passed
11-1-2017; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 8.18.030 NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNER - REFUSAL OF OWNER TO COMPLY - VIOLATION A
MISDEMEANOR OR AN INFRACTION.
   (A)   The Fire Chief or Director shall notify the owner, occupant or agent
thereof, or person in charge or control of the property, each hereinafter
referred to as “owner,” personally or by certified mail, of such accumulation
and shall conspicuously post such notice in writing on any lot or premises upon
which the Fire Chief or Director determines after investigation that such
public nuisance exists. Such notice shall bear a title with the words “notice
to clean premises” in letters not less than one inch in height, and it shall
direct the abatement of the nuisance and refer to this chapter for particulars.
Such notice shall require the owner to commence the abatement within five days
and to complete such abatement within ten days from the date of the notice.
Notices which are served by certified mail shall be addressed to the owner of
the property at the address ascertained from title company records or as
otherwise known. Service by certified mail shall be deemed complete upon
deposit in a public receptacle for United States mail. The notices shall
specify that a failure to comply with the notice is a misdemeanor or an
infraction.
   (B)   Any firm, corporation, owner, agent, occupant or person in charge or
control of real property who refuses or neglects to remove and abate any
accumulation of matter described in §
8.18.010 within the ten-day period set forth in any “notice to clean premises”
served upon them shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction. Each
succeeding day that a person, firm or corporation refuses or neglects to remove
and abate the matters determined to be a nuisance shall constitute a separate
misdemeanor or infraction under this section. In the case of an appeal filed
pursuant to §
8.18.040, the time period for required removal and abatement shall be extended
as set forth in §
8.18.040.
   (C)   The Fire Chief or Director shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter and are authorized to make arrests and issue notices pursuant to the
Cal. Penal Code, Part 2, Title 3, Chapter 5C.
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction, which, upon conviction
thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
   (E)   The conviction of a misdemeanor or an infraction under this chapter
shall have no effect on any abatement process or procedure followed by the
city.
(Ord. 3367, passed 8-22-1973; Ord. 3701, passed 1-24-1978; Ord. MC-241, passed
12-21-1982; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1449, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 8.18.040 CONTENTS OF NOTICE - APPEAL.
   (A)   Any notice issued by the Director (i.e., city) shall state that, any
time within ten days from the date of posting and service of such notice, any
person may appeal the decision of the Director by filing written objections
thereto with the City Clerk. The Director shall then cause the matter to be set
for hearing before a hearing officer contracted by the city to hear such
matters.
   (B)   Notice of the date of hearing shall be given in writing. The date of
the hearing shall be no sooner than 15 days from the date when notice of the
hearing is given to the appellant and to the Director.
   (C)   At the time fixed in the notice, the administrative hearing officer
shall hear the testimony of all competent persons desiring to testify
respecting the condition constituting the nuisance.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine
whether or not a nuisance exists, and if the hearing officer so concludes, he
or she may declare the conditions existing to be a nuisance and direct the
person owning the property upon which the nuisance exists to abate it within
ten days after the date of posting on the premises a notice of the hearing
officer’s order. The hearing officer may amend time to abate the nuisance, if,
in his or her opinion, there exists good cause for the amendment of time to
abate.
   (E)   The decision of the hearing officer on the determination of nuisance
is final. Any appeal of the hearing officer’s decision shall be governed by
Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, § 1094.6 or such section as may be amended from
time to time.
   (F)   Any notice issued by the Fire Chief (i.e., county) shall be appealable
pursuant to the appeal procedure set forth under Chapter 23.310.
(Ord. 3367, passed 8-22-1973; Ord. 3701, passed 1-24-1978; Ord. 3838, passed 6-
19-1979; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1449, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 8.18.050 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   In the event the nuisance is not abated by the owner, the Fire Chief or
Director is authorized to cause such nuisance to be abated by removing the
rubbish, refuse, debris, waste material and other matter, including, but not
limited to, rocks; bricks; scrap metal and other pieces of metal, both ferrous
and non-ferrous; furniture or parts thereof; vegetation; cans; boxes; barrels;
bottles; stores of commercial supplies and other matter, whether usable or not;
straw; shavings; sacks; bags; litter; weeds; dry grass; dead trees or shrubs or
branches thereof; used lumber or wood; combustible waste; fragments of any
nature or kind; sawdust; excelsior; printed matter; paper; pasteboard;
cardboard; cardboard boxes; or crockery. The Fire Chief or Director and any
contractor hired by the city for such purpose shall have the right to enter
upon private property to abate the public nuisance.
(Ord. 3367, passed 8-22-1973; Ord. 3701, passed 1-24-1978; Ord. 3838, passed 6-
19-1979; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1449, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 8.18.060 REPORT OF ABATEMENT COSTS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief or Director shall thereafter cause a report of the
action and an accurate account of the costs to be filed with the City Clerk.
   (B)   The statement shall be accompanied by a notice to the owner that the
cost of abatement may be protested as set forth in §
8.18.063.
(Ord. 3367, passed 8-22-1973; Ord. MC-178, passed 7-7-1982; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1449, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 8.18.061 RECOVERY OF ATTORNEYS’ FEES AND REPORT OF ATTORNEYS’ FEES.
   (A)   In any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding to
abate a nuisance, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recovery of
attorneys’ fees. The recovery of attorneys’ fees by the prevailing party shall
be limited to those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects,
at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of
its own attorneys’ fees.
   (B)   In no action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding shall an
award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. The City
Attorney’s office shall thereafter cause a report of the action and an accurate
account of costs to be filed with the City Clerk.
(Ord. MC-1449, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 8.18.062 TREBLE DAMAGES.
   Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a
two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a
condition that may be abated in accordance with this ordinance, except for
conditions abated pursuant to the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 17980, related
to substandard buildings, the court may order the owner to pay treble the costs
of the abatement.
(Ord. MC-1449, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 8.18.063 PROTEST OF ABATEMENT COSTS.
   (A)   The property owner may protest the cost of abatement by filing a
written request for a hearing on the abatement costs with the Fire Chief or
Director, whoever caused the nuisance to be abated, and the Fire Chief or
Director shall cause a hearing to be set before the administrative hearing
officer. At the time fixed for the hearing on the statement of abatement costs,
the administrative hearing officer shall consider the statement and protests or
objections raised by the person liable to be assessed for the cost of the
abatement.
   (B)   The hearing officer may revise, correct or modify the statement as the
hearing officer considers just and thereafter shall confirm the cost.
   (C)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall be
served by mail. The decision of the hearing officer on the abatement costs
shall be final.
   (D)   Any appeal of the hearing officer’s decision shall be governed by Cal.
Code of Civil Procedure, § 1094.6 or such section as may be amended from time
to time.
(Ord. MC-1449, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 8.18.065 COUNCIL ACTION.
   (A)   If the property owner does not pay the cost of abating the nuisance
within 30 calendar days after the cost becomes final or the hearing officer
confirms the costs of abatement, the cost shall become a special assessment
against the real property upon which the nuisance was abated. The assessment
shall continue until it is paid, together with interest at the legal maximum
rate computed from the date of confirmation of the statement until payment. The
assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary
municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and
the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary
municipal taxes.
   (B)   The Director shall notify the property owner in writing of the
property owner’s right to be publicly heard by City Council prior to City
Council adopting a resolution assessing such unpaid costs of abatement as liens
upon the respective parcels of land. The notice shall include the date, time
and location of the public hearing.
   (C)   The City Council shall adopt a resolution at a public hearing
assessing such unpaid costs of abatement as liens upon the respective parcels
of land as they are shown upon the last available assessment roll.
(Ord. MC-1449, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 8.18.066 IMPOSITION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT LIEN AND NOTICE.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall prepare and file with the County Auditor a
certified copy of the resolution of the City Council assessing the costs of
abatement as a lien on the land, adopted pursuant to §
8.18.065.
   (B)   Notice of lien shall be mailed by certified mail to the property
owner, if the property owner’s identity can be determined from the County
Assessor’s or County Recorder’s records. The notice shall be given at the time
of imposing the assessment and shall specify that the property may be sold
after three years by the Tax Collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The
Tax Collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the
property owner to receive notice.
   (C)   The County Auditor shall enter each assessment on the county tax roll
upon the parcel of land. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and
in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be
subject to the same penalties and procedure and sale in case of delinquency as
is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy,
collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the
special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of
abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for
value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and
attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes
would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien
against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured
roll for collection. The tax collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by
the failure of the property owner to receive notice.
(Ord. MC-1449, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 8.18.067 RECORD OF NUISANCE ABATEMENT LIEN.
   As an additional remedy, the Director may cause a nuisance abatement lien
for costs related to abatements, other than dangerous building abatements, to
be recorded with the Assessor-Recorder-County Clerk, pursuant to the provisions
of Cal. Gov’t Code, § 38773.1.
(Ord. MC-1449, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 8.18.068 COLLECTION OF COSTS AND ATTORNEYS’ FEES PRIOR TO HEARING.
   The city may accept payment of any amount due at any time prior to the
filing of a certified copy of the City Council resolution assessing the
abatement costs with the County Auditor.
(Ord. MC-1449, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 8.18.070 INVENTORY OF SALVAGEABLE MATTER.
   (A)   When any of the matter referred to in §
8.18.010 or other materials have been removed from the yard, lot or premises
pursuant to the abatement procedures set forth in §§
8.18.050 and
8.18.060 and have been determined by the Director to be salvageable, the matter
and materials shall be inventoried and held and retained by the Director for a
period of at least 30 days after written notice that the matter and materials
are being held at a specified place for delivery to the owner thereof and a
copy of the inventory has been served, by certified mail, to the last address
of record, postage prepaid, or by personal delivery, upon the owner.
   (B)   In the event the owner does not take possession of and remove at his
or her own expense the matter and materials from the place where stored by the
Director within 30 days after the service upon him or her, the city shall have
a lien against the matter and materials for storage charges for the 30-day
period, and the matter and materials shall thereafter be appropriated for the
use of the city or disposed of or sold at public auction as follows.
      (1)   Notice of such sale describing the matter and material in
sufficient detail for its identification shall be published once by the
Director at least five days before the time fixed for the sale in a regularly
published newspaper of general circulation in the city.
      (2)   The matter and materials offered for sale shall be sold to the
highest bidder for cash; provided that the Director may, at his or her
discretion, fix a minimum sale price and may refuse to sell unless the minimum
price is offered.
      (3)   Proceeds of the auction sale or sales shall be applied towards the
cost of abatement of the nuisance and the remainder, if any, shall be deposited
with the Department of Finance and Management Services, to be placed in the
General Fund thereof; provided that in the event the costs of conducting the
auction sale or sales and the storage charges, combined with the costs of
abatement, are less than the proceeds, then the balance or difference between
the costs and the total proceeds shall be refunded to the owner.
(Ord. 3367, passed 8-22-1973; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1449,
passed 11-1-2017; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 8.18.080 URGENT PUBLIC NUISANCE - NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNER.
   (A)   If the Fire Chief or Director determines that a nuisance consisting of
any or all matter referred to in §
8.18.010 constitutes an urgent public nuisance, he or she shall notify the
owner or occupant of the lot or premises to abate the same, and if the nuisance
is not abated within 48 hours after service or posting of notice and no appeal
to the Fire Chief or Director is pending, then the Fire Chief or Director shall
cause the lot or premises to be cleared of all such matter and the nuisance to
be abated, and the expense of such clearing shall be a lien on the lot.
   (B)   The notice given shall state that the finding of an urgent nuisance
may be appealed to the City Clerk within 48 hours of receipt. If abatement is
ordered upon appeal to the Fire Chief or Director, the abatement shall be
completed within 48 hours of the decision.
   (C)   In any case, the Fire Chief or Director may extend the time within
which the nuisance is to be abated if abatement cannot be completed within 48
hours. The notice required under this section shall be in writing and shall be
delivered to the owner at the address appearing in records of a title company
or as may be known, except if the owner cannot be located after a reasonable,
good faith effort, then notice may be delivered to the occupant of the premises
or conspicuously posted on such lot or premises. If the owner does not reside
within the city, the notice of nuisance may be sent by special delivery mail,
and shall be effective 24 hours after mailing. Actual notice by telephone,
supplemented by mailing, shall be effective as of the time of the telephoned
notice.
   (D)   The procedures to be followed with respect to the assessment of the
expenses of abatement shall be the same as those set forth in §
8.18.060 and
Chapter 8.30.
   (E)   URGENT PUBLIC NUISANCE, as employed in this section, means a condition
of property which is a menace to public health or safety or constitutes a fire
hazard under conditions which would be judicially determined to be a nuisance
per se or a nuisance in fact, or where the destruction or removal of the
objectionable items is reasonably necessary under the circumstances to prevent
immediate harm to the public.
(Ord. 3367, passed 8-22-1973; Ord. MC-178, passed 7-7-1982; Ord. MC-241, passed
12-21-1982; Ord. MC-279, passed 6-21-1983; Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015; Ord.
MC-1449, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 8.18.082 SUMMARY ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE PER SE WITHOUT NOTICE.
   (A)   In cases where the Fire Chief of the Director finds the existence of a
public emergency or threatening public calamity or where immediate action is
essential, he or she may order the abatement of any or all matter referred to
in §
8.18.010 without notice or hearing, and the expense of such abatement shall be
a lien on the lot.
   (B)   The matter referred to in §
8.18.010 which may be abated pursuant to this section shall be those things
which are by the common or statute law declared to be nuisances per se, or
which are in their very nature palpably and indisputably such.
   (C)   The procedures to be followed with respect to the assessment of the
expense of abatement shall be the same as those set forth in §
8.18.060 and
Chapter 8.30.
(Ord. MC-280, passed 6-21-1983; Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1449,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 8.18.090 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, partnership, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, interfering, obstructing or preventing or causing the
interference, obstruction or prevention of or with the enforcement or
performance of any of the provisions of this chapter by the Fire Chief,
Director or other authorized person is guilty of a misdemeanor or an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 3367, passed 8-22-1973; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1449,
passed 11-1-2017)
CHAPTER 8.19: ABATEMENT OF FIRE HAZARDS AND HAZARDOUS TREES
Section
   
8.19.010   Adoption by reference
   
8.19.020   Interpretation of County Weed Abatement Code as applied to city
   
8.19.030   Amendments, additions and deletions to County Weed Abatement Code
   
8.19.040   Remedies and penalties
Editor’s note:
   This chapter is added by Ord. MC-1445, passed 5-15-2017.
§ 8.19.010 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   Chapter 3 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code,
entitled “Abatement of Fire Hazards and Hazardous Trees” (§§ 23.0301 through
23.0319) (“County Weed Abatement Code”), is adopted by reference under the
authority of Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 50020 to 50022.9.
(Ord. MC-1445, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 8.19.020 INTERPRETATION OF COUNTY WEED ABATEMENT CODE AS APPLIED TO CITY.
   Whenever “county,” “County of San Bernardino” or “unincorporated area of the
County of San Bernardino” is used, it shall mean the City of San Bernardino
unless a different geographical area is clearly indicated by the context.
(Ord. MC-1445, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 8.19.030 AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS TO COUNTY WEED ABATEMENT CODE.
   The County Weed Abatement Code, as adopted by §
8.19.010, is effective with the changes, additions and deletions as set forth
in this section: § 23.0307 is amended to read as follows:
For the purpose of enforcing this Chapter, the County Fire Chief/Fire Warden
may designate any person as his or her deputy in the performance of the duties
enjoined upon him or her by this Chapter. In addition, each of the following
officers is hereby designated to perform the same duties within the City of San
Bernardino. Whenever the term County Fire Chief/Fire Warden is used in this
Chapter, the following officers are included in the meaning of such phrase,
except that the County Fire Chief/Fire Warden shall coordinate all such
officers in the performance of these duties:
   (a)   The City of San Bernardino Code Enforcement Division Manager and their
designees.
   (b)   Other officers hereafter designated by the Mayor and City Council or
the County Fire Chief/Fire Warden.
(Ord. MC-1445, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 8.19.040 REMEDIES AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   All remedies and penalties provided for in this chapter shall be
cumulative and discretionary, and not exclusive, in accordance with this
section and in the same manner as provided by § 11.0202 of the San Bernardino
County Code.
   (B)   All persons authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter are
authorized to conduct investigations and inspections in accordance with this
section and in the same manner as provided by § 11.0203 of the San Bernardino
County Code.
   (C)   Each and every day, and any portion of which, any violation of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted shall be deemed a new and separate
offense and shall be punishable or actionable as set forth in this section.
   (D)   Whenever in this chapter any act or omission is made unlawful, it
shall include causing, permitting, aiding or abetting such act or omission.
   (E)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
other entity (hereafter “person”) to violate any provision of this chapter
constituting a public offense. Any person violating any such provision, unless
as otherwise specified for certain sections, shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified.
      (2)   To any person so convicted, the following shall apply.
         (a)   A first offense shall constitute an infraction offense and
punished by a base fine not exceeding $100 and not less than $50.
         (b)   A second offense within one year shall constitute an infraction
offense and punished by a base fine not exceeding $200 and not less than $100.
         (c)   The third and any additional offense within one year shall
constitute either an infraction or a misdemeanor offense, and if it is an
infraction offense, shall be punishable by a base fine not exceeding $500, or
if a misdemeanor offense, punishable by up to six months in jail, and/or base
fine not exceeding $1,000.
         (d)   Any court costs that the court may otherwise be required to
impose pursuant to applicable state law or local ordinance shall be imposed in
addition to the base fine (Cal. Gov’t Code, § 25132).
      (e)   Notwithstanding the above, a first or second offense may be charged
and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by up to six months in jail, and/or
base fine not exceeding $1,000.
      (f)   Payment of any fine or service of a jail sentence shall not relieve
a person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity from the
responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation.
   (F)   Criminal citations shall be issued in the same manner and under the
same authority as provided by § 11.0206(b) of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (G)   All violations of this chapter may be subject to enforcement through
the initiation of a civil action in accordance with this section and in the
same manner and under the same authority as provided at § 11.0207 of the San
Bernardino County Code.
   (H)   As an alternative to the criminal or civil enforcement of this
chapter, all violations of this chapter may be subject to enforcement through
the use of administrative citations in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code, §
53069.4 and this section, and in the same manner and under the same authority
as provided at § 11.0208 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. MC-1445, passed 5-15-2017)
CHAPTER 8.21: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1232, passed 10-3-2006)
CHAPTER 8.24: SOLID WASTE COLLECTION, REMOVAL, DISPOSAL, PROCESSING AND
RECYCLING
Section
   
8.24.010   Definitions
   
8.24.020   Authority of City Manager to make rules and regulations
   
8.24.030   Applicability
   
8.24.040   General provisions
   
8.24.050   Failure to pay
   
8.24.060   Storage and ownership
   
8.24.070   Nuisance
   
8.24.080   Scrap tires
   
8.24.090   Mandatory residential, commercial and multi-family recycling and
organic recycling
   
8.24.095   Mandatory commercial edible food recovery
   
8.24.100   Construction and demolition debris recycling program
   
8.24.110   Containers
   
8.24.120   Illegal dumping
   
8.24.130   Enforcement
   
8.24.140   Forms, regulations and guidelines
§ 8.24.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADC or ALTERNATIVE DAILY COVER. Cover material used to cover compacted solid
waste in a disposal site, other than at least six inches of earthen material,
placed on the surface of the active face of the solid waste fill area at the
end of each operating day to control vectors, fires, odors, blowing litter and
scavenging, as defined in § 20164 of Title 27 of the California Code of
Regulations, as may be amended from time to time.
   APPLICANT. Any individual, firm, limited liability company, association
partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry,
public or private corporation or any other entity whatsoever who applies, or is
required to apply, to the city for permit(s) to undertake a construction,
demolition or renovation project within the city.
   BIN or BINS. Those two, three, four and six cubic yard containers provided
by franchised hauler for the collection of solid waste.
   BULKY WASTE. Large and small household appliances, furniture, carpets,
mattresses, white goods, brown goods, clothing, automobile tires and oversized
yard waste such as tree trunks and large branches if no larger than two feet in
diameter and four feet in length and similar large items, or any other solid
waste item requiring special handling, discarded by residential customers.
BULKY WASTE is a form of solid waste when discarded by the generator into the
waste stream. The term BULKY WASTE does not include consumer electronics, such
as televisions, radios, computers, monitors and the like, which are regarded as
universal waste electronic devices, the disposal of which is governed by
regulation of the Department of Toxic Substances Control.
   BYPRODUCTS.
      (1)   All materials produced, developed or generated incidental to the
operation of any business, which is not the principal object of production of
such business, but which material, due to its nature, can be sold by the
producer thereof at a price greater than the cost of hauling such material to
the point of delivery or sale;
      (2)   All material which, due to its nature, can be sold by the producer
thereof, at the point of production, for valuable consideration; and
      (3)   All such material as the City Manager designates as byproducts.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of San Bernardino, or his or her
designee, including city employees or entities hired by the city to implement
the requirements of this chapter.
   CITY PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION (C&D) WASTE POLICY. The city’s
standards for recycling C&D waste from landfills for city contracted projects,
set forth in a resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   COMMERCIAL. Premises in the city, other than residential and city premises,
where solid waste is generated or accumulated. The term COMMERCIAL includes,
but is not limited to, stores; offices; restaurants; rooming houses; hotels;
motels; industrial and manufacturing processing or assembly shops or plants;
hospitals, clinics, convalescent centers and nursing homes (non-medical waste).
   COMMERCIAL FACILITY. All retail, professional, office, wholesale and
industrial facilities and other commercial enterprises offering goods or
services and multi-family dwelling units located within the boundaries of the
city.
   COMMERCIAL GENERATOR. A commercial facility or business which generates
garbage, organic waste or recyclable materials as a result of its business,
commercial facility or property activity. COMMERCIAL GENERATOR also means any
multi-family residential property of four or more units and multi-family
residential properties under four units that share solid waste collection
services. COMMERCIAL GENERATOR may also include tenants, property managers for
facilities with leased space, employees and contractors of commercial
generator. COMMERCIAL GENERATOR also includes the city, its facilities and its
non-residential properties.
   CONSTRUCTION. The act of assembly, erection, demolition, addition,
alteration or remodel and similar and related activities, of any facility,
structure, improvement or any portion thereof or appurtenance thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS or C&D WASTE or C&D. Commonly used or
discarded materials removed from construction, remodeling, repair, demolition
or renovation operations on any pavement, house, commercial building or other
structure, or from landscaping. Such materials include, but are not limited to,
byproducts, dirt, sand, rock, gravel, bricks, plaster, gypsum wallboard,
aluminum, glass, asphalt material, plastics, roofing material, cardboard,
carpeting, cinder blocks, concrete, copper, electrical wire, fiberglass,
formica, granite, iron, lead, linoleum, marble, plaster, plant debris,
pressboard, porcelain, steel, stucco, tile, vinyl, wood, masonry, rocks, trees,
remnants of new materials, including paper, plastic, carpet scraps, wood
scraps, scrap metal, building materials, packaging and rubble resulting from
construction, remodeling, renovation, repair and demolition operations on
pavement, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. CONSTRUCTION AND
DEMOLITION DEBRIS does not include exempt waste.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION (C&D) DIVERSION REQUIREMENT. The minimum
percentage of C&D for each project to be diverted from landfills, as set forth
in a resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION (C&D) WASTE RECYCLING AND DISPOSAL REPORT
SUMMARY. A form submitted by the applicant or any covered project after
completion of a project. The documentation shall include actual data of tonnage
of materials recycled and diverted, supported by originals or certified
photocopies of receipts and weight tags or other records of measurement from
recycling companies, contractors and/or landfill and disposal companies.
   CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTOR. Any state licensed construction contractor
performing construction at a job site. CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTOR includes the
general contractor and any subcontractors at the site. A person or company
employed, whether for a fee or otherwise, to haul recyclable materials and C&D
waste generated by a CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTOR is not a CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTOR
for purposes of this chapter.
   COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER. The San Bernardino County Health Department’s
designee who serves to advise and lead a team of professionals on matters of
public health importance.
   COVERED PROJECT. Any project that meets or exceeds the COVERED PROJECT
threshold set forth by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   CONTAINER. Any heavy plastic or galvanized metal box, can, cart, barrel,
bin, hopper, roll off, compactor or similar type container used for the
accumulation of garbage, recyclable materials, organic waste or C&D.
   CUSTOMER. The owner and/or occupant of any property within the city that is
required to participate in the city’s solid waste collection programs.
   DEMOLITION. The decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any
facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether
interior or exterior.
   DIVERT or DIVERSION. A reduction of the amount of waste being disposed in
landfills by any of the following methods:
      (1)   On-site re-use of the materials/waste;
      (2)   Delivery of the waste from the site to a recycling facility; or
      (3)   Other methods as approved by the City Manager.
   DUMP. To throw or deposit litter and other solid waste items in or upon any
street, sidewalk or other place within the city, except the placement of litter
and other solid waste items in proper containers for collection.
   E-WASTE. Any electronic product nearing the end of its useful life and
includes, but is not limited to, computers and their components, televisions,
VCRs, stereos, copiers and fax machines.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any individual appointed by City Manager of the City of
San Bernardino, or his or her designee, who has authority to issue criminal or
administrative citations pursuant to
Chapters 9.90,
9.92 and
9.93.
   EXEMPT WASTE. Hazardous waste, sludge, automobiles, automobile parts, boats,
boat parts, boat trailers, internal combustion engines and those wastes under
the control of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
   FOOD WASTE. Food scraps and trimmings from food preparation, including, but
not limited to: meat, fish and dairy waste; fruit and vegetable waste; grain
waste; incidental food packaging; and incidental food soiled paper products.
   FRANCHISED HAULER. A hauler holding a franchise, contract, license or permit
issued by the city which authorizes the exclusive or non-exclusive right to
provide solid waste handling services within all or part of the jurisdictional
boundaries of the city.
   GARBAGE. All solid waste that is not otherwise recyclable material or
organic waste and to normal activities of a solid waste generator. GARBAGE must
be generated by and at the premises wherein the GARBAGE is collected. GARBAGE
does not include recyclable materials, organic waste, construction and
demolition debris, bulky waste, E-waste, universal waste, hazardous waste,
household hazardous waste or exempt waste.
   GENERATOR. Any commercial generator or residential generator of solid waste.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any material which is defined as a hazardous waste under
California or United States law or any regulations promulgated pursuant to such
law, as such as local, state or federal law or regulations may be amended from
time to time.
   HEARING OFFICER. Any individual appointed by the City Manager of the City of
San Bernardino, or his or her designee, to hear the appeal on a determination
of a nuisance.
   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE. Dry cell household batteries, cell phones and
PDAs; used motor oil; used oil filters when contained in a sealed plastic bag;
cooking oil; compact fluorescent light bulbs contained in a sealed plastic bag;
E-waste; cleaning products, pesticides, herbicides, insecticides, painting
supplies, automotive products, solvents, strips and adhesives; auto batteries;
and universal waste.
   JOB SITE. A location at which solid waste and C&D waste are generated by a
construction contractor.
   OCCUPANT. Every owner of, and every tenant or person who is in possession
of, is the inhabitant of or has care and control of a residence or commercial
building. For the purpose of this definition, a residence or commercial
building shall be presumed to be inhabited if gas, electric, telephone and
water utility service is being furnished thereto.
   OCCUPIED PREMISES are occupied when a person or persons take or hold
possession of the premises for permanent or temporary use. For the purposes of
determining whether a premises is occupied during periods when solid waste
collection service is made available to such premises, occupancy shall be
presumed unless evidence is presented that electric services were not being
provided to the premises during such periods.
   ORGANIC WASTE. Organic waste and food waste. ORGANIC WASTE is a form of
solid waste when discarded into the waste stream. ORGANIC WASTE includes, but
is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Plant material (branches, grass clippings, natural Christmas trees,
palm fronds, leaves, shrubbery, tree trimmings, weeds);
      (2)   Wood (non-toxic wood products without paint and foreign objects of
appropriate size for the container);
      (3)   Food waste (cooked and uncooked food matter, incidental food
packaging and incidental food soiled paper products for commercial customers);
and
      (4)   Byproducts.
   PERSON. Any natural person, individual, firm, limited liability company,
partnership, public or private corporation or association or any other entity
whatsoever.
   PROJECT. Any activity that requires an application for a building or
demolition permit from the city.
   RECYCLABLE C&D. All C&D waste that is used within any of the following
categories:
      (1)   Masonry building materials, including, but not limited to, asphalt,
concrete, rock, stone and brick;
      (2)   Wood materials, including any and all dimensional lumber, fencing
or construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, CCA pressure
treated, contaminated or painted;
      (3)   Vegetable materials, including trees, tree parts, shrubs, stumps,
logs, brush or any other type of plants that are cleared from a site as part of
the project;
      (4)   Metals, including all metal scrap, such as, but not limited to,
pipes, siding, window frames, door frames and fences;
      (5)   Roofing materials, including wood shingles as well as asphalt,
stone and slate based roofing material;
      (6)   Salvageable materials includes all salvageable materials and
structures, including, but not limited to, wallboard, doors, windows, fixtures,
toilets, sinks, bath tubs and appliances; and
      (7)   Any other C&D waste that is non-hazardous and available for
recycling or reuse.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. A part of the waste stream that can be reused or
processed into a form suitable for reuse through reprocessing or remanufacture,
consistent with the requirements of 1989 Assembly Bill 939, being codified in
part at Cal. Public Resources Code, Division 30, commencing with § 40000.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Plastics (all numbered plastics);
      (2)   Metals (aluminum cans, aluminum foil, empty aerosol cans, pie tins,
tin cans);
      (3)   Fiber materials (cardboard, cereal boxes, envelopes, file folders,
frozen food boxes, junk mail, magazines, mixed paper, office paper, newspaper,
telephone books, white paper);
      (4)   Glass (all colors of glass jars and bottles, except light bulbs,
mirror and window glass); and
      (5)   Byproducts.
   RECYCLING. The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and
reconstituting divertible solid waste and returning them for use or reuse in
the form of raw materials for new, used or reconstituted products which meet
the quality standard necessary to be used in the market place. RECYCLING does
not include transformation, as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code, § 40201.
   RECYCLING FACILITY. A recycling, composting, materials recovery or reuse
facility that has obtained all applicable federal, state and local licensing,
certification and permitting and that is operating in full compliance with all
applicable regulations. The City Manager shall maintain a list of approved
facilities for reference by the applicant. The applicant may use an unlisted
facility of his or her choice if the applicant, prior to beginning a project,
provides documentation demonstrating that the unlisted facility qualifies as a
RECYCLING FACILITY under this definition.
   RENOVATION. Any change, addition or modification in an existing structure.
   RESIDENCE or RESIDENTIAL. Any and all dwelling units, as defined in the Land
Use Zoning Ordinance of the City of San Bernardino, and other buildings used
for residential or dwelling purposes.
   RESIDENTIAL GENERATOR. An owner, tenant or resident of any residential
property which generates garbage, organic waste or recyclable materials as a
result of occupancy or property activity, including all generators not
otherwise meeting the definition of commercial generator.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The individual or entity responsible for the generator’s
management of solid waste at the generator’s commercial facility, business or
non-residential property.
   ROLL-OFF. A metal container that is normally loaded onto a motor vehicle and
transported to an appropriate facility.
   SALVAGE. The controlled removal of C&D waste from a project site for the
purpose of recycling, reuse or storage for later recycling or reuse.
   SECURITY DEPOSIT. The cash or cash equivalent deposit required as security
for all covered projects. The amount of the SECURITY DEPOSIT shall be set forth
in a resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   SELF-HAUL. When a responsible party collects recyclable materials and/or
organic waste materials at their place of business for the purpose of hauling
those materials in their own vehicles to a permitted recycling or organic waste
processing facility in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   SELLER. Any person, business, corporation, partnership or any other business
entity that engages in the sale and/or exchange of new and/or used tires as a
regular part of their business, including, but not limited to, wholesale and
retail tire dealers, automotive service centers, automotive repair centers, new
and used automotive dealers, new and used automotive parts vendors and
automotive dismantlers.
   SHARPS. Needles, scalpels, blades, broken medical glass, broken capillary
tubes and ends of dental wires.
   SLUDGE. The accumulated solids, residues and precipitates generated as a
result of waste treatment or processing, including wastewater treatment, water
supply treatment or operation of an air pollution control facility, and mixed
liquids and solids pumped from septic tanks, grease traps, privies or similar
disposal appurtenances or any other such waste having similar characteristics
or effects.
   SPECIAL SERVICES. Any solid waste or solid waste related services that are
not provided in the city’s normal course of solid waste related services,
including, but not limited to, pick-up service for bulky waste, container
repair, container exchange and/or replacement, roll-out service and additional
unscheduled collection.
   SOLID WASTE. Any materials defined as SOLID WASTE by Cal. Public Resources
Code, § 40191, and specifically includes, without limitation, C&D waste,
recyclable materials, organic waste, bulky waste, byproducts and all other non-
hazardous materials, excluding universal waste, that are discarded into the
waste stream by the generator, or collected in exchange for a fee or any other
consideration, regardless of form or amount.
   SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES. The collection, transportation, processing,
recycling, composting, conversion, retention and disposal of all garbage,
organic waste (including commercial organic waste, food waste and organic
waste), recyclable materials, construction and demolition debris, bulky waste,
household hazardous waste and universal waste, produced, generated and/or
accumulated within the city.
   TENANT. Any person or persons, other than the owner, occupying or in
possession of a premises.
   UNIVERSAL WASTE. Includes, but is not limited to, “universal waste
electronic devices” or “UWEDs,” (i.e., electronic devices subject to the
regulation of the Department of Toxic Substances Control, 22 CCR §§ 66273.1 et
seq.), and other universal wastes, including, but not limited to, non-empty
aerosol cans, fluorescent tubes, high intensity discharge lamps, sodium vapor
lamps and any other lamp exhibiting a characteristic of a hazardous waste,
batteries (rechargeable nickel-cadmium batteries, silver button batteries,
mercury batteries, small sealed lead acid batteries (burglar alarm and
emergency light batteries) alkaline batteries, carbon-zinc batteries and any
other batteries which exhibit the characteristic of a hazardous waste), mercury
thermometers and mercury containing switches.
(Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016)
§ 8.24.020 AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER TO MAKE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Manager shall have the authority to make reasonable rules and
regulations concerning the storage, collection, transportation and disposal of
solid waste by persons as he or she shall find necessary and to place
additional limitations not specifically addressed herein on types and
quantities of waste which may be placed in containers when the City Manager
determines that such rules and regulations are necessary to protect the health
and safety of the general public or city employees, or to comply with state or
federal law or regulations.
(Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016)
§ 8.24.030 APPLICABILITY.
   The chapter shall apply to all users of the city’s solid waste services
within the city and to users outside the city who are, by permit, contract or
agreement with the city, users of the city’s solid waste collection services or
are conducting business or activities within the city which fall under the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016)
§ 8.24.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Provision of solid waste services.
      (1)   Solid waste related activities within the city shall be performed
under the direction of the City Manager, and for such purposes, the city may
use city personnel, enter into contract agreements with private hauling firms
or approve franchise agreements to perform such activities. Solid waste
enterprises operating pursuant to such a contract or franchise agreement shall
meet the terms, rates, standards and services specified in the contract or
franchise agreement. However, the City Manager may authorize any person to
collect, remove and disperse garbage, recyclable materials and organic waste
under such terms, conditions and limitations deemed necessary in the interests
of the public health, safety and welfare.
      (2)   No person, solid waste enterprise or the agents, servants or
employees thereof shall provide solid waste collection services within the city
without approval, which shall be issued only on a vote of the City Council. All
recycling, organic waste and garbage collections shall be made as quietly as
possible, and the City Manager may fix and determine the hours for collection.
      (3)   Except as expressly called out in the franchise agreement, the
franchised hauler is granted the exclusive franchise, duty, right and privilege
to collect, transfer, transport, recycle, process and dispose of garbage,
organic waste and recyclable materials generated within the boundaries of city
subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the franchise agreement.
   (B)   Subscription required. The property owner or tenant of each occupied
premises shall have at least the minimum level of solid waste collection
service made available to that premises by the franchised hauler, as specified
in the franchise agreement between the city and the franchised hauler. At its
discretion, the city may require a higher level of solid waste collection
service if the current level of service is deemed insufficient. The charges for
solid waste collection service rendered or made available shall be paid for all
periods of time during which the premises are occupied, regardless of whether
or not the owner or tenant has any solid waste to be collected on any
particular collection date during such occupancy. Nothing in this chapter is
intended to prevent an arrangement, or the continuance of an arrangement, under
which payments for solid waste collection service are made by a tenant or
tenants, or any agent or other person, on behalf of the owner. However, any
such arrangement will not affect the property owner’s obligation to pay for
solid waste collection service as provided herein.
   (C)   Commencement of solid waste collection service. The property owner or
tenant shall commence solid waste collection service within seven days after
occupancy of a premises, or portion thereof. In the event service is not
initiated within such period of time, the City Manager may give written notice
to the owner or tenant that solid waste collection service is required. If
service is not initiated by the property owner or tenant within seven days
after the date of mailing the notice, the City Manager shall authorize the
franchised hauler to begin and continue providing the minimum level of solid
waste collection service to such premises and the service shall be deemed to
have been made available as of the date of such authorization.
   (D)   Charge for solid waste collection service. Any and all charges for
solid waste collection service shall be set forth in the franchise agreement,
contract or the collection service agreement between the city and its
franchised hauler.
   (E)   Special services. Customers requiring special services shall contact
the franchised hauler to arrange for such service. Charges for such special
services shall be set forth in the franchise agreement.
   (F)   Exemption from service. Any customer may make an application for
exemption from solid waste collection services on the basis that a developed
property is unoccupied, and that no garbage, organic waste or recyclable
materials shall be placed or offered for collection by the city or its
authorized franchised hauler from such property. The City Manager may
temporarily exempt such property from participation in the city’s solid waste
collection program for the limited period while the property is unoccupied;
provided that any such statement or representation shall be made in affidavit
form, fully sworn to by the person making such statement or representation and
filed with the City Manager. An exemption shall be valid only for the time that
the statements made in the affidavit continue to be true. Any violation of
provisions of the exemption shall result in termination of the exemption and
shall require the customer to subscribe to the solid waste collection services
in accordance with this chapter.
   (G)   City Manager may restrict self-haul. Nothing in this chapter is
intended to prevent residents, that subscribe and pay for solid waste
collection services with the franchised hauler, from self-hauling garbage,
recyclable materials or organic waste to permitted solid waste facilities, and
other solid wastes (excluding garbage, recyclable materials and organic waste)
in excess of their normal subscription level to facilities that accept and
responsibly process those materials, as may be necessary from time to time.
However, the City Manager may restrict or prohibit self-hauling by individual
generators if the City Manager determines, after providing notice and an
opportunity for a hearing, that the generator’s self-hauling activities violate
the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable law or regulation.
   (H)   Organics prohibited from use as alternative daily cover. Pursuant to
the provisions of 2014 Assembly Bill 1594 (AB 1594, which amended the Cal.
Public Resources Code, §§ 40507 and 41781.3), the franchised hauler, and any
generators who self-haul organic waste, may not direct their organic waste for
use as ADC. If the City Manager determines that the franchised hauler or any
other generator has directed any organic waste for use as ADC, the City Manager
will notify the franchised hauler or generator of the requirements of this
provision. Repeated instances of directing organic waste for use as ADC may
result in enforcement action as per §
8.24.130.
(Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016)
§ 8.24.050 FAILURE TO PAY.
   (A)   Failure to pay for solid waste collection service. The franchised
hauler shall be entitled to payment from the property owner, tenant or any
other subscribing person on behalf of the property owner for any services
rendered or to be rendered. Solid waste collection service shall not be
discontinued for residential customers by reason of any failure to pay the
charges for such service. The franchised hauler may temporarily suspend
services if a commercial customer has been delinquent in payment for a period
of at least 45 days in accordance with the terms of the franchise agreement.
   (B)   Notification of delinquency.
      (1)   Customers (owners or tenants) who have not remitted required
payment within 45 days after the date of billing shall be notified by the
franchised hauler on forms that contain a statement that if payment is not
received within 15 days from the date of the notice, the delinquent and unpaid
charges, including a 10% penalty and 1.5% monthly interest, may be placed on
the county annual secured property tax rolls and that any amount owing would
then become a lien on the property. Contractor shall provide such notice to
customers via U.S. mail to the current billing address on file.
      (2)   All notices pursuant to this division (B) shall be made to the
property owner, if the property owner is the subscriber, or else to the
property owner and tenant or any other subscribing person on behalf of the
property owner. The form of delinquency notice shall be approved by the City
Manager.
   (C)   Assignment of delinquent account. In the event the bill for solid
waste collection service, together with any late charge thereon, is not paid in
full within 30 days after the date of mailing the notice of delinquency to the
property owner and tenant pursuant to division (B) below, the franchised hauler
may assign such bill to the city for collection through the initiation of lien
and special assessment proceedings. The assignment shall include the name and
address of the property owner and tenant, the assessor’s parcel number of the
premises, the period of solid waste collection service covered by the bill, the
amount owed for such service, the amount of any late charge and such other
information as requested by the City Manager, together with a copy of the
notices of delinquency mailed or otherwise delivered to the property owner and
tenant with proof of service.
   (D)   Initiation of special assessment and lien. Upon the city’s receipt of
the assignment from the franchised hauler, the City Manager shall prepare a
report of delinquent solid waste collection service charges and initiate
proceedings to create a special assessment and lien on the premises to which
the solid waste collection service was provided. The City Manager shall fix a
time, date and place for an administrative hearing by the City Manager to
consider any objections or protests to his or her report.
   (E)   Notice of administrative hearing on special assessment and lien. The
City Manager shall send written notice of the administrative hearing to the
property owner and tenant of the premises against which the special assessment
and lien will be imposed at least ten days prior to the hearing date. The
notice shall be mailed to each person to whom such premises is assessed in the
latest equalized assessment roll available on the date the notice is mailed, at
the address shown on said assessment roll or as known to the City Manager. A
copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the franchised hauler. Said notice
shall set forth the amount of delinquent solid waste collection service
charges, the amount of any late charge thereon and shall inform the recipient
of the possible levy of a special assessment and lien on the premises and
administrative charges as provided in this division. Said notice shall also
inform the property owner and tenant of the time, date and place of the
administrative hearing and the subsequent public hearing to be conducted by the
City Council, include a link to the webpage on which the administrative hearing
order and final report in division (F) below will be posted and advise the
property owner and tenant of his or her right to appear at both the
administrative hearing and the public hearing to state his or her objections to
the report or the proposed special assessment and lien.
   (F)   Administrative hearing on special assessment and lien. At the time and
place fixed for the administrative hearing, the City Manager shall hear and
consider any objections or protests to his or her report. The City Manager may
correct or modify the report as he or she deems appropriate, based upon the
evidence presented at the hearing, and shall post a copy of the decision on the
city website. The City Manager shall thereupon submit a final report to the
City Council for confirmation and shall post a copy of such final report on the
city website.
   (G)   Public hearing on special assessment and lien. The City Council shall
conduct a public hearing to consider the City Manager’s final report at the
time and place set forth in notice described in division (E) above. At such
hearing, any interested person shall be afforded the opportunity to appear and
present evidence as to why the final report, or any portion thereof, should not
be confirmed. The City Council’s review shall be limited to the administrative
record and evidence presented at the City Manager’s administrative hearing. The
City Council may adopt, revise, reduce or modify any charge shown in the final
report or overrule any or all objections as it deems appropriate, based upon
the evidence presented at the hearing. If the City Council is satisfied with
the final report as rendered or modified, the City Council shall confirm such
final report by resolution. The decision by the City Council on the final
report and any objections or protests thereto shall be final and conclusive.
   (H)   Recording of lien. Upon confirmation by the City Council of the final
report, the City Manager shall cause to be recorded in the office of the
Recorder for the County of San Bernardino, a lien against each premises
described in the final report for the amount of delinquent solid waste
collection service charges and late charges as confirmed by the City Council by
resolution. The lien shall also include such additional administrative charges
as established by resolution of the City Council. All affected property owners
shall be notified by the City Manager that the delinquent solid waste
collection service charges, late charges and administrative charges are due and
payable to the city and that said lien has been recorded.
   (I)   Levy of special assessment. Upon confirmation by the City Council of
the City Manager’s final report, as rendered or modified, the delinquent solid
waste collection service charges, late charges and administrative charges
contained therein shall constitute a special assessment levied upon the
premises against which such charges have been imposed. The City Manager shall
file a copy of the final report, together with a certified copy of the
resolution by the City Council confirming the same, with the tax collector for
the county with instructions to enter the delinquent solid waste collection
service charges, late charges and administrative charges as special assessments
against the respective premises described in the City Manager’s lien report.
The tax collector shall include such special assessment on the next regular
bill for secured property taxes sent to the property owner.
   (J)   Collection of special assessment. The special assessment shall be
collected at the same time in the same manner and frequency and by the same
persons as ordinary municipal taxes, and shall be subject to the same interest
and penalties and the same procedure of sale as provided for delinquent
ordinary municipal taxes. The special assessment shall be subordinate to all
existing special assessment liens previously imposed upon the premises and
paramount to all other liens except those for state, county and municipal
taxes, with which it shall be upon parity. Each special assessment shall
continue until all of the delinquent solid waste collection service charges,
late charges and administrative charges due and payable thereon are paid in
full. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal
taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment.
(Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016; Ord. MC-1612, passed 3-15-2023)
§ 8.24.060 STORAGE AND OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Sufficient container capacity and storage of containers. All persons
occupying or maintaining any premises within the city where garbage, organic
waste and recyclable materials are created, produced or accumulated shall
maintain sufficient standard containers for receiving and holding all garbage,
organic waste and/or recyclable materials which are produced, created or
accumulated on such premises. No containers shall be allowed to be stored in
the public streets or rights-of-way. Except on days established for collection,
all solid waste containers shall be placed out of sight of the public right-of-
way, except for temporary containers, as described below. Containers may be
stored in alleys but must not cause obstruction for emergency, solid waste
collection or other vehicles. Containers may be temporarily stored in public
streets or rights-of-way. In commercial areas of the city that have limited
space for the placement of containers, upon written request of the property
owner or occupant, the city may allow the bins or carts as provided by the
franchised hauler to be placed in public parking lots expressively for the
purpose of normal weekly collection by the franchised hauler.
   (B)   Design review. The design of any new, substantially remodeled or
expanded building or other facility shall provide for proper storage of
garbage, organic waste and recyclable materials and which will allow for
efficient and safe waste removal or collection. The design shall be submitted
for approval to the Development Environmental Review Committee and shall meet
all applicable regulations.
   (C)   Ownership of solid waste materials. All solid waste placed in
containers provided by any franchised hauler for collection shall be considered
owned by and be the responsibility of the franchised hauler. All materials
placed in containers provided or owned by the generator shall be considered
owned by and be the responsibility of that generator until the material is
placed at a franchised hauler’s designated point of collection and in
containers described in §
8.24.010. The occupant, business owner, or his or her authorized agent, may
retrieve or remove any materials from the container, prior to collection.
   (D)   Unlawful collection. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
the business of collecting, removing or transporting, or otherwise organize or
direct the collection, removal or transportation, of recyclable materials
without being a franchised hauler. Nothing in this chapter limits the right of
any person to donate or sell his or her recyclable materials, including to
recognized non-profit charitable organizations conducting fundraising events
for a public purpose. No cost or fees of any sort, including those for hauling
services or use of containers, may be charged. Additionally, containers
provided by the franchised hauler may not be used for the storage of recyclable
materials that the occupant intends to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of
through a party other than the franchised hauler.
   (E)   Posting of signs. Signs which state, in both English and Spanish, that
removal of recyclable materials from containers is illegal and punishable by a
fine of up to $1,000 or up to six months in jail, or both, shall be posted at
each of the following locations:
      (1)   On all commercial recycling bins;
      (2)   At the entrance to buy-back centers; and
      (3)   Vending machine-type containers located within the city.
(Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016)
§ 8.24.070 NUISANCE.
   (A)   Nuisance prohibited. No person shall accumulate solid waste in any
amount that creates a nuisance. If accumulation of solid waste creates a
nuisance, the City Manager may require a more frequent collection schedule and/
or removal of the accumulated solid waste. Furthermore, the following apply.
      (1)   Putrescible solid waste, including garbage and organic waste, shall
not be allowed to remain on the premises for more than seven days.
      (2)   The occupant of any property may not dispose of solid waste on his
or her property (with the exception of organic wastes that are composted on-
site via backyard composting).
      (3)   No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited
any solid waste upon any premises whatsoever except at permitted solid waste
facilities (for garbage and organic waste) or facilities that accept and
responsibly process other solid wastes (excluding garbage and organic waste).
      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to burn, or cause to be burned, any
solid waste within the city.
      (5)   It is unlawful for any person to dispose of any burning ash or
embers in solid waste containers.
      (6)   It is unlawful for any person to place in any container identified
for recyclable materials or organic waste any material that would inhibit its
ability to be recycled or composted. Containers set aside for recyclable
materials or organic waste shall be used only for recyclable materials or
organic waste and no other materials.
      (7)   No person shall place or deposit in any garbage, recycling or
organic waste container for collection pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter any unbroken and exposed hypodermic needles, medicines, pills, poisons,
caustic acids, explosives or similar dangerous substances which may cause human
injury or harm.
      (8)   No person shall place or deposit in any garbage, recycling or
organic waste container for collection pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter wearing apparel, bedding or other articles from any home or place where
any infectious or contagious disease has prevailed. The occupant of any
premises where an infectious or contagious disease has prevailed shall
forthwith notify the county health officer and shall dispose of such articles
in accordance with his or her directions.
      (9)   No person shall place or deposit in or upon any container or
container within the city any E-waste, but shall deposit such E-waste with an
authorized recycler of E-waste products.
   (B)   Containers must be covered and kept clean. All solid waste set out by
generators on the street or other designated location for collection by the
franchised hauler shall be placed in covered containers. No container shall be
loaded beyond its capacity. It shall be the responsible parties’ responsibility
to keep the containers used for the storage and collection of solid waste
material generated on the premises in a clean and sanitary condition. No
material or containers shall be kept or handled in such a manner as to become a
nuisance. No solid waste shall be allowed to become odoriferous or a producer
of vermin. Lids on containers shall remain closed at all times while stored or
placed for collection.
   (C)   Damage to or removal of containers. It is unlawful for any person to
mar, injure, damage or destroy, or to take or remove any container furnished or
provided pursuant to this chapter.
   (D)   Hauling and transport. No generator, self-hauler or franchised hauler
shall transport solid waste over any public street, alley, right-of-way or
parking plaza unless solid waste is contained and covered in such a manner as
to prevent the dropping or spilling of any solid waste, litter or liquid upon
the public street, alley, right-of-way or parking plaza.
(Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016)
§ 8.24.080 SCRAP TIRES.
   (A)   Disposal of scrap tires.
      (1)   Every seller of new or used tires within the city upon request by
an authorized agent or employee of the city must demonstrate that each such
tire has been disposed of properly by one of the following methods:
         (a)   Manifest provided by a state-permitted waste tire hauler
company; and
         (b)   Any alternative methods formally approved by CalRecycle.
      (2)   The city shall provide copies of manifest forms to any seller of
new or used tires within the city upon request from the seller to the city. Any
seller of new or used tires within the city who cannot adequately demonstrate
to City Manager that each whole tire was disposed of properly by one of the
above methods shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to civil and/or
criminal prosecution by the city.
   (B)   Penalty for unlawful disposal of whole tires.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to dispose of whole tires in any of the
following manners within the city:
         (a)   Placement of whole tires in or around any regular commercial,
industrial or residential container within the city. A residential customer may
contact the franchised hauler to arrange for on-call collection of up to two
whole tires twice per calendar year, with a maximum of four tires per calendar
year; and
         (b)   Placement of whole tires on any public or private property
within the city, unless said property is a registered waste tire facility as
set forth in Cal. Public Resources Code, §§ 42800 to 42855.
      (2)   Any seller of new or used tires within the city who willfully and
knowingly places whole tires in or around any regular commercial, industrial or
residential solid waste container within the city or along any public or
private property, or who allows or directs another party to willfully and
knowingly place whole tires in any regular commercial, industrial or
residential container within the city or along any public or private property,
shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter, and subject to civil and/or
criminal prosecution by the city.
   (C)   Posting of notice. Every seller of new or used tires within the city
must post the following notice:
“NOTICE: Every tire left with this facility for disposal is assessed a
surcharge established by California Public Resources Code 42885. This surcharge
is for the costs of disposal and for development of new uses for scrap tires.
Other charges may also be imposed by this operator to cover actual disposal or
recycling costs.
In order to prevent the illegal disposal of used tires within the City of San
Bernardino, if you elect to keep your used tires for private use or disposal,
you will be required to sign a Certificate of Removal stating the number of
tires that you removed, your name, address and California Driver’s License
Number. This information will be furnished to the City of San Bernardino.
Illegal disposal of whole tires is a violation of Chapter
8.24.080 of the City of San Bernardino Municipal Code, and may result in fines
and penalties.”
(Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016)
§ 8.24.090 MANDATORY RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND MULTI-FAMILY RECYCLING AND
ORGANIC RECYCLING.
   (A)   All solid waste generators responsible for compliance. Each generator
shall be responsible for ensuring and demonstrating its compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Recycling and organics collection required. Each generator shall
subscribe to a level of service with the franchised hauler that is sufficient
to handle the volume of recyclable materials and organic waste generated or
accumulated on the premises. Additionally, each generator shall ensure the
proper separation of solid waste, as established by the franchised hauler, by
placing each type of material in designated containers or containers, and
ensure that employees, contractors, volunteers, customers, visitors and other
persons on site conduct proper separation of solid waste.
   (C)   Implementation.
      (1)   Each generator shall use containers provided by the franchised
hauler to collect and store recyclable materials and organic waste, and shall
designate areas to collect and/or store these materials. Each generator shall
prominently post and maintain one or more signs in maintenance or work areas or
common areas where recyclable materials and organic waste are collected and/or
stored that specify the materials to be recycled and how to recycle such
material. The city shall notify and instruct generators in writing of
applicable recycling and organic waste requirements. Upon request by
generators, the city will also provide outreach and training to commercial
generator employees and tenants regarding what materials are required to be
recycled and how to recycle such material.
      (2)   Additionally, the following apply.
         (a)   The City Manager shall annually work with the franchised hauler
to identify generators subject to the requirements in this chapter.
         (b)   The City Manager shall review franchised hauler data to confirm
whether all commercial generators are compliant with the requirements of this
chapter by reviewing subscription levels of garbage, organic waste and
recycling collection services. Those generators who do not subscribe to the
required collection services with the franchised hauler will be notified of the
requirement to subscribe organic waste and recyclable materials.
         (c)   The City Manager shall work with the franchised hauler to
conduct site visits with select commercial generators each year, covering all
commercial generators every five years, in order to document whether generators
participate in the required recycling and organic waste collection programs
(not just subscribe) and are, therefore, in compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.
         (d)   The City Manager shall annually work with any non-compliant
generators in order to bring them into compliance with the requirements of this
chapter by providing outreach, education and technical assistance to facilitate
compliance.
         (e)   All generators shall be responsible for ensuring and
demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this chapter within 30 days
of notification of non-compliance. Failure to demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of this chapter shall be cause for enforcement.
(Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016; Ord. MC-1566, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.24.095 MANDATORY COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD RECOVERY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. Includes a tier one or a tier two
commercial edible food generator, as defined below.
      DESIGNEE. An entity that the city contracts with or otherwise arranges to
carry out any responsibilities of this chapter. A DESIGNEE may be a government
entity, a hauler, a private entity or a combination of those entities.
      EDIBLE FOOD. Unsold or unserved food that is fit for human consumption,
even though the food may not be readily marketable due to appearance, age,
freshness, grade, size, surplus or other conditions. For the purposes of this
section, EDIBLE FOOD is not solid waste if it is recovered and not discarded.
      FOOD. Has the same meaning as in the Cal. Health and Safety Code, §
113781.
      FOOD FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in the Cal. Health and Safety
Code, § 113789.
      FOOD RECOVERY. Actions to collect and distribute food for human
consumption which otherwise would be disposed.
      FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION. An entity that primarily engages in the
collection or receipt of excess edible food from edible food generators and
distributes that edible food to the public for consumption, including, but not
limited to:
         (a)   A food bank, as defined in the Cal. Health and Safety Code, §
113783;
         (b)   A non-profit charitable organization, as defined in the Cal.
Health and Safety Code, § 113841; and
         (c)   A non-profit charitable temporary food facility, as defined in
the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 113842.
      FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE. A person or entity that collects and transports
edible food from an edible food generator to a food recovery organization or
other entities for food recovery.
      FOOD SERVICE DISTRIBUTOR. An entity primarily engaged in providing food
services to institutional, governmental, commercial or industrial locations of
others based on contractual arrangements with these types of organizations.
      GROCERY STORE. A store primarily engaged in the retail sale of canned
food; dry goods; fresh fruits and vegetables; fresh meats, fish and poultry;
and any area that is not separately owned within the store where the food is
prepared and served, including a bakery, deli and meat and seafood departments.
GROCERY STORE includes convenience stores.
      HEALTH FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in the Cal. Health and Safety
Code, § 1250.
      HOTEL. Has the same meaning as in the Cal. Business and Professions Code,
§ 17210.
      LARGE EVENT. An event, including, but not limited to, a sporting event or
a flea market, that charges an admission price, or is operated by a local
agency, and serves an average of more than 2,000 individuals per day of
operation of the event, at a location that includes, but not limited to, a
public, non-profit or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street
system or other open space when being used for an event.
      LARGE VENUE. A permanent venue facility that annually seats or serves an
average of more than 2,000 individuals within the grounds of the facility per
day of operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this section, a venue
facility includes, but is not limited to, a public, non-profit or privately
owned or operated stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park,
conference or civic center, zoo, aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse track,
performing arts center, fairground, museum, theater or other public attraction
facility. For purposes of this section, a site under common ownership or
control that includes more than one LARGE VENUE that is contiguous with other
LARGE VENUES in the site is a single LARGE VENUE.
      LOCAL EDUCATION AGENCY. A school district, charter school or county
office of education that is not subject to the control of city or county
regulations related to solid waste.
      RESTAURANT. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of food
and drinks for on premises or immediate consumption.
      SUPERMARKET. A full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual
sales of $2,000,000 or more, and which sells a line of dry grocery, canned
goods or non-food items and some perishable items.
      TIER ONE COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A commercial edible food
generator that is one of the following:
         (a)   Supermarket;
         (b)   Grocery store with a total facility size equal to or greater
than 7,500 square feet;
         (c)   Food service distributor; and
         (d)   Wholesale food market.
      TIER TWO COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A commercial edible food
generator that is one of the following:
         (a)   Restaurant with 250 or more seats, or a total facility size
equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet;
         (b)   Hotel with an on-site food facility and 200 or more rooms;
         (c)   Health facility with an on-site food facility and 100 or more
beds;
         (d)   Large venue;
         (e)   Large event;
         (f)   A state agency with a cafeteria with 250 or more seats or total
cafeteria facility size equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet; and
         (g)   A local education agency facility with an on-site food facility.
      WHOLESALE FOOD MARKET. A food establishment in which food (including
fruits and vegetables) is received, shipped, stored, prepared for distribution
to a retailer, warehouse, distributor or other destination.
   (B)   Commercial edible food generators responsible for compliance.
      (1)   Tier one commercial edible food generators must comply with the
requirements of this chapter commencing January 1, 2022, and tier two
commercial edible food generators must comply commencing January 1, 2024,
pursuant to 14 CCR § 18991.3.
      (2)   Large venue or large event operators not providing food services,
but allowing for food to be provided by others, shall require food facilities
operating at the large venue or large event to comply with the requirements of
this section, commencing January 1, 2024.
   (C)   Commercial edible food generators requirements. Commercial edible food
generators shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Arrange to recover the maximum amount of edible food that would
otherwise be disposed;
      (2)   Contract with or enter into a written agreement with food recovery
organizations or food recovery services for:
         (a)   The collection of edible food for food recovery; or
         (b)   Acceptance of the edible food that the commercial edible food
generator self-hauls to the food recovery organization for food recovery.
      (3)   Shall not intentionally spoil edible food that is capable of being
recovered by a food recovery organization or a food recovery service;
      (4)   Allow city’s designated enforcement entity or designated third
party enforcement entity to access the premises and review records pursuant to
14 CCR § 18991.4; and
      (5)   Keep records that include the following information or as otherwise
specified in 14 CCR § 18991.4:
         (a)   A list of each food recovery service or organization that
collects or receives its edible food, pursuant to a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b);
         (b)   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under
14 CCR § 18991.3(b); and
         (c)   A record of the following information for each of those food
recovery services or food recovery organizations:
            1.   The name, address and contact information of the food recovery
service or food recovery organization;
            2.   The types of food that will be collected by or self-hauled to
the food recovery service or food recovery organization;
            3.   The established frequency that food will be collected or self-
hauled; and
            4.   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per month,
collected or self-hauled to a food recovery service or food recovery
organization for food recovery.
   (D)   Requirements for food recovery organizations and services.
      (1)   Food recovery services collecting or receiving edible food directly
from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written agreement
established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following records, or
as otherwise specified by 14 CCR § 18991.5(a)(1):
         (a)   The name, address and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the service collects edible food;
         (b)   The quantity in pounds of edible food collected from each
commercial edible food generator per month;
         (c)   The quantity in pounds of edible food transported to each food
recovery organization per month; and
         (d)   The name, address and contact information for each food recovery
organization that the food recovery service transports edible food to for food
recovery.
      (2)   Food recovery organizations collecting or receiving edible food
directly from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following
records, or as otherwise specified by 14 CCR § 18991.5(a)(2):
         (a)   The name, address and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the organization collects edible food;
         (b)   The quantity in pounds of edible food collected from each
commercial edible food generator per month; and
         (c)   The name, address and contact information for each food recovery
service that the organization transports edible food to for food recovery.
      (3)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services that have
their primary address physically located in the city and contract with or have
written agreements with one or more commercial edible food generators pursuant
to 14 CCR § 18991.3(b) shall report to the city the total pounds of edible food
recovered in the previous calendar year from the tier one and tier two
commercial edible food generators they have established a contract or written
agreement with pursuant to 14 CCR § 18991.3(b) no later than March 31 of every
calendar year.
      (4)   In order to support edible food recovery capacity planning
assessments or other studies conducted by the county, city or other regional
agencies that provide solid waste collection services, or its designated
entity, food recovery services and food recovery organizations operating in the
city shall provide information and consultation to the city, upon request,
regarding existing, or proposed new or expanded, food recovery capacity that
could be accessed by the city and its commercial edible food generators. A food
recovery service or food recovery organization contacted by the city or its
franchise hauler shall respond to such request for information within 60 days,
unless a shorter time frame is otherwise specified by the city.
(Ord. MC-1566, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.24.100 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS RECYCLING PROGRAM.
   (A)   Covered and non-covered projects. Covered projects are required to
divert recyclable C&D from landfills. The minimum C&D diversion requirement is
established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council. Applicants for
construction, demolition, addition, alteration and remodel projects within the
city that are not covered projects are encouraged to divert the minimum C&D
diversion requirement.
   (B)   City projects. City-contracted construction shall adhere to the city
project C&D waste policy established by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council.
   (C)   Security deposit required. Except as otherwise specified in this
chapter, each applicant for a building or demolition permit for a covered
project shall remit a security deposit in the amount established by resolution
of the Mayor and City Council. The security deposit shall be remitted prior to
permit issuance.
   (D)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Neither a C&D waste recycling and disposal report summary nor a
security deposit shall be required for the following:
         (a)   Work for which only a plumbing permit, electrical, mechanical
permit or a combination thereof is required;
         (b)   Seismic tie-down projects;
         (c)   Installation of a patio or awning;
         (d)   Installation of pre-fabricated accessories such as signs or
antennas;
         (e)   Residential pools and spas;
         (f)   Re-roof projects, block walls and retaining walls;
         (g)   City owned projects; and
         (h)   Other work that the City Manager determines will not produce
significant quantities of construction or demolition waste.
      (2)   An applicant for projects may submit an application for exemption
on the grounds that the project will not generate more than 35 gallons of C&D
waste. The application shall be submitted to the City Manager who shall
determine if the exemption is in compliance with this chapter.
   (E)   Refund of security deposit. The City Manager may authorize the refund
of any security deposit that was erroneously paid or collected. The City
Manager may authorize the refund of any security deposit when the building
permit application is withdrawn or cancelled before any work has begun. The
City Manager may authorize the refund of a security deposit when the applicant
has satisfactorily submitted the C&D waste recycling and disposal report
summary, and at least the minimum C&D diversion requirement is met. lf the
minimum C&D diversion requirement is not realized, the amount of the refund
shall correspond to the percentage of C&D waste recycled, reused or diverted
from the landfill. If the applicant fails to submit the documentation required
by this section within the required time period, the security deposit shall be
forfeited to the city.
   (F)   Administrative fee. As a part of any application for, and prior to the
issuance of, any building or demolition permit, every applicant for a covered
project, unless otherwise exempt, shall pay an administrative fee sufficient to
compensate the city for all expenses incurred in reviewing the project and
reviewing performance. The amount of this fee shall be set forth in a
resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (G)   Reporting. Within 60 days following the completion of a demolition
project and/or a covered project, the applicant shall, as a condition precedent
to release of the security deposit, submit a C&D waste recycling disposal
report summary to the City Manager.
   (H)   Appeal. Any appellant aggrieved by the decision of the City Manager
relating to a security deposit under division (D) or (E) above may appeal the
decision to the hearing officer in the manner provided in
Chapter 9.94.
   (I)   Construction debris self-hauling.
      (1)   A construction contractor may self-haul recyclable materials or C&D
waste generated by the construction contractor at the job site. When acting as
a general contractor, the construction contractor may haul these same materials
for any construction contractor acting as a subcontractor at the same job site.
      (2)   The right of a construction contractor to self-haul or haul
hereunder is subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   All construction contractors generating any of the recyclable
materials or C&D waste to be self-hauled or hauled shall have a valid city
business registration certificate;
         (b)   The construction contractor owns or leases the self-hauling or
hauling equipment (excluding containers) and the equipment is clearly marked
with the identity of the construction contractor including, as a minimum
threshold requirement, the company name, address and phone number;
         (c)   The construction contractor must be performing construction and
demolition work on the permitted job site;
         (d)   The construction contractor cannot serve solely as a hauler of
debris from the job site;
         (e)   The construction contractor provides proof of insurance for said
vehicle;
         (f)   The construction contractor’s equipment shall be operated by an
employee of the construction contractor at all times during any self-haul or
haul to a disposal or processing facility in a manner consistent with all
appropriate laws and regulations;
         (g)   The construction contractor performing the self-haul or haul
holds a current building and demolition permit which covers all recyclable
materials or construction and demolition debris for which the construction
contractor will be performing self-hauling or hauling, and the construction
contractor complies with the construction and demolition provisions of the
city;
      (h)   The construction contractor shall hold for a self-hauling permit
fee as set by the Mayor and City Council; and
      (i)   Regardless of the valuation of the project, the construction
contractor performing the haul or self-haul must comply with this article and
shall submit an application fee, security deposit as set by the Mayor and City
Council and obtain a C&D permit for projects, as defined in §
8.24.010.
(Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 8.24.110 CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Containers - franchise required. The franchised hauler is the
exclusive provider of containers for the collection of C&D, garbage, recyclable
materials, organic waste and large items. This includes any and all containers
placed in the public right-of-way, on city property, private property or
elsewhere in the service area, for collection of C&D, garbage, recyclable
materials, organic waste and large items and subsequent delivery to a permitted
solid waste facility. Collection utilizing containers may be on a temporary or
permanent basis, in accordance with the terms of the franchise agreement
between the city and the franchised hauler. Any containers left on the public
right-of-way, public property or private property by a company or person
without a contract or franchise agreement with the city to provide such
services shall be deemed illegal and subject to removal pursuant to these
provisions.
   (B)   Notice to remove.
      (1)   Upon determination that a container is illegal, the owner of the
container will be called and notified of such violation, if it is marked, and
the owner will be given 24 hours to remove the container. A “notice to remove
container” shall be posted on the container and mailed to the owner, if the
owner’s address is known or easily ascertainable. If the container is unmarked
and the owner is unknown, a 24-hour posting of the notice to remove the illegal
container shall be deemed sufficient notice.
      (2)   The notice shall be in substantially the following form:
“NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN pursuant to Chapter
8.24.110 of the San Bernardino Municipal Code that the City Manager, or his or
her designee, has determined that this container was placed in the City of San
Bernardino without the necessary contract or franchise agreement and is hereby
deemed illegal and that the removal of the container is required. This
container must be removed from the City of San Bernardino within twenty-four
(24) hours of the date and time of this Notice. Failure to remove this
container will result in the seizure of the bin by the City of San Bernardino
or the franchised hauler. A hearing may be requested within fifteen (15) days
of the seizure to reclaim the container. If no hearing is requested within
fifteen (15) days, the container will become the property of the City of San
Bernardino. The owner may waive a hearing by paying the costs for removal,
storage, and disposal, if any, of the container. The total amount of costs to
be paid may be obtained from the City.”
   (C)   Notice to remove - exemptions. The city may waive the 24-hour notice
to remove a container in the event that the owner of the illegally placed
containers can be identified and the city possesses documentation of at least
two prior instances of issuing notices to remove and subsequent removal of
containers owned by the same owner in the prior 12 months.
   (D)   Cost of removal of containers. The cost of removal of an illegally
placed container, including all costs for removal, storage and disposal of the
container and its contents, will be set by the city via resolution. Payment of
those costs will be the responsibility of the owner of the illegally placed
container.
   (E)   Removal hearing and appeal process.
      (1)   Any illegal container that has been removed by the city or
franchised hauler shall be stored pending a hearing before the City Manager.
Said hearing must be requested within 15 days and scheduled within 30 days
following the removal of the container.
      (2)   The owner of the container may waive the hearing and pay the city’s
costs for removal, storage and disposal of the container and claim the
container. The amount of costs will be determined by the City Manager.
      (3)   If the container is not claimed and no hearing is requested within
15 days of removal of the container, the container will become the property of
the city and the city may dispose of or use the container as the city may deem
appropriate.
      (4)   If a hearing is timely requested, the City Manager shall determine
whether the owner of the container had a contract or franchise agreement with
the city. If the City Manager determines that the owner of the container did
not have the requisite contract or franchise agreement with the city, the City
Manager may order the container returned to the owner after payment of the
costs for removal, storage and disposal of the container. If the City Manager
determines that the owner did have the requisite contract or franchise
agreement with the city, the container shall be returned to the owner at no
cost to the owner.
      (5)   The owner of a container that is the subject of a timely hearing
may appeal the City Manager’s decision to the hearing officer within ten days
of the City Manager’s decision. The hearing officer’s decision shall be final.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the hearing officer may obtain review
of such decision by filing an appeal with the Superior Court of the State of
California, County of San Bernardino, in accordance with the time lines and
provisions set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code, § 53069.4 and Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure, §§ 1094.5 and 1094.6.
(Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016)
§ 8.24.120 ILLEGAL DUMPING.
   (A)   Accumulations.
      (1)   Every person owning or occupying any building, lot or premises in
the city shall keep such property in a clean and sanitary condition; this
includes keeping the area around a container free of excessive solid waste and
preventing the placement of material in the container that requires special
handling, such as furniture and electronic appliances, E-waste or hazardous
materials. The occupant shall not cause or permit combustible or putrescible
solid waste to collect or accumulate for more than one week, or cause or permit
any other non-combustible solid waste to accumulate for a period in excess of
one month; provided, however, the provisions of this chapter shall not be
construed to interfere with any occupant keeping building materials upon
premises during construction, reconstruction or repair of a building or
structure thereon under a valid building permit, nor with the keeping of wood
neatly piled upon such premises for household use.
      (2)   Any violation of this chapter may be reported to the City Code
Enforcement Department or Public Works Department. If a designated employee of
the city who has the authority to issue criminal or administrative citations
pursuant to
Chapters 9.90,
9.92 and
9.93 determines that a violation of this chapter exists, the designated
employee will post a notice of violation (“NOV”) requiring the property owner
or occupant to bring the property into compliance. If the occupant does not
respond to or comply with the notice of violation, the city will take the
necessary steps to bring the property into compliance, including, if necessary,
cleaning and sanitizing the container area. The occupant shall be held
responsible for all fees and costs incurred as a result of the city bringing
the property into compliance.
   (B)   Burning solid waste. No garbage, recyclable materials, organic waste
or any solid waste shall be burned in the open air within the city limits,
unless such burning is conducted in a properly built sanitary incinerator
meeting all federal, state and local air emissions regulations.
   (C)   Dumping and burying.
      (1)   No person shall dump, place or deposit upon or bury in any lot,
land, street, alley, water or waterway within the city any garbage, recyclable
materials, organic waste or substance condemned by the County Health Department
or any other deleterious or offensive substance; provided, however, the
provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any land used by the county or
its agents as a public landfill.
      (2)   It is unlawful to collect, dump or deposit any garbage, recyclable
materials, organic waste upon any property located within the city belonging to
another either with or without the consent of the owner thereof, including, but
not limited to, any property, public or private, any highway, off-ramp, street,
sidewalk, curb, gutter or other property; and it is unlawful to establish or
maintain a place for dumping garbage, recyclable materials, organic waste in
the city, or to collect, receive and dump any garbage, recyclable materials,
organic waste on one’s own property, save and except such solid waste as shall
reasonably accumulate upon such property in the reasonable and lawful use
thereof.
   (D)   Contamination of recyclable materials and organic waste. No person
shall place in any container identified for recyclable materials or organic
waste any material that would inhibit its recyclability or compostability.
Containers set aside for recyclable materials or organic waste shall be used
only for recyclable materials or organic waste and no other materials. No
glass, paper, plastic, razor blades, metal, chemicals or other substances
rendering such organic waste unfit for the consumption of animals or production
of soil amendments or compost shall be mixed therewith.
   (E)   Dangerous and infected substances.
      (1)   No person shall place or deposit in any garbage, recyclable
materials, organic waste container for collection pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter any unbroken and exposed hypodermic needles, medicines, pills,
poisons, caustic acids, explosives or similar dangerous substances which may
cause human injury or harm. Customers may contact the city for information
regarding the city’s sharps collection program.
      (2)   No person shall place or deposit in any garbage, recyclable
materials, organic waste container for collection pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter wearing apparel, bedding or other articles from any home or place
where any infectious or contagious disease has prevailed. The occupant of any
premises where an infectious or contagious disease has prevailed shall
forthwith notify the county health officer and shall dispose of such articles
in accordance with his or her directions.
   (F)   E-waste. No person shall dump, place or deposit in or upon any
container within the city any E-waste, but shall deposit such E-waste with an
authorized recycler of E-waste products.
§ 8.24.130 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   City Manager authorization. The City Manager is authorized to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The City Manager, or
anyone designated by the City Manager to be an enforcement officer, may
exercise such enforcement powers. If the City Manager determines that a solid
waste generator is in violation of this chapter or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant to this chapter, the City Manager may begin enforcement
proceedings. Public nuisance proceedings and/or code enforcement proceedings
under the city’s code shall apply, in addition to the administrative penalties
approved by resolution of the City Council, as modified from time to time.
Enforcement proceedings may include issuing notices of violation, requiring
changes in subscription service levels or assessing administrative fines.
   (B)   Administrative citations and orders.
      (1)   A violation of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor and
may be punished as such, however, at the discretion of the City Attorney, the
violation of any provisions of this article may be filed as an infraction. The
complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the violation is a
misdemeanor or an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010,
Chapter 9.92 and
Chapter 9.93.
      (2)   For purposes of §
1.12.010,
Chapter 9.92 and
Chapter 9.93., each violation of this chapter by the same person or entity,
regardless of the location of the violation, shall be considered a subsequent
or repeat offense. The city’s procedures on imposition of administrative fines
are incorporated in its entirety and shall govern the imposition, enforcement,
collection and review of administrative citations or orders issued to enforce
this chapter and any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter;
provided, however, that the City Manager may adopt regulations providing for
lesser penalty amounts. The City Manager has the authority to impose
administrative penalties for the notices of violations.
      (3)   Failure to pay administrative penalties or fines shall result in
the recording of a lien of the property that is the subject of the citation
pursuant to Chapters
9.92.090 and Chapter
9.93.170.
   (C)   Additional remedies.
      (1)   The City Attorney may seek injunctive relief or civil penalties in
the Superior Court in addition to the above remedies and penalties. All
administrative civil penalties collected from actions pursuant to this chapter
shall be paid to the city and shall be deposited into a solid waste
administrative account that is available to fund activities to implement the
applicable provisions of this chapter. Any remedy provided under this chapter
is cumulative to any other remedy provided in equity or at law. Nothing in this
chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of the city or its authorized
collection agent(s) to bring a civil action; nor shall a conviction for such
violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by the city or its
authorized collection agent(s). The fees and penalties imposed under this
chapter shall constitute a civil debt and liability owing to the city from the
persons, firms or corporations using or chargeable for such services and shall
be collectible in the manner provided by law. Nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed to impose any liability upon the city or upon any of its employees
including without limitation under the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (being 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq.,
“CERCLA”).
      (2)   This chapter does not do any of the following:
         (a)   Otherwise affect the authority of the City Manager to take any
other action authorized by any other provision of law;
         (b)   Restrict the power of a City Attorney, District Attorney or the
Attorney General to bring in the name of the People of California, any criminal
proceeding otherwise authorized by law;
         (c)   Prevent the City Manager from cooperating with, or participating
in, a proceeding specified in this chapter; or
         (d)   Affect, in any way, existing contractual arrangements, including
franchises, permits or licenses, previously granted or entered into between the
franchised hauler and city.
(Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016)
§ 8.24.140 FORMS, REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES.
   The City Manager may adopt necessary forms, rules, regulations and
guidelines which may be necessary or desirable to aid in the administration or
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The city may provide information
on its website regarding what materials are accepted as recyclable materials,
organic waste and garbage under this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016)
CHAPTER 8.24.5: CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE RECYCLING PROGRAM
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016)
CHAPTER 8.25: SCRAP TIRES
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1431, passed 11-10-2016)
CHAPTER 8.27: NUISANCES
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
CHAPTER 8.30: PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
   
8.30.010   Purpose
   
8.30.015   Definitions
   
8.30.020   Declaration of nuisances
   
8.30.021   Summary/emergency abatement
   
8.30.022   Summary/emergency abatement post-abatement hearing
   
8.30.023   Method of giving notice
   
8.30.025   Determination of nuisance
   
8.30.026   Additional requirements for demolition of buildings or structures
   
8.30.030   Appeal
   
8.30.035   Time limit for compliance
   
8.30.040   Abatement by city
   
8.30.041   Report of abatement costs
   
8.30.042   Recovery of attorneys’ fees and report of attorneys’ fees
   
8.30.043   Treble damages
   
8.30.045   Hearing on nuisance abatement costs
   
8.30.050   Council action
   
8.30.055   Imposition of special assessment lien and notice
   
8.30.056   Recording of nuisance abatement lien
   
8.30.060   Collection of costs and attorneys’ fees prior to hearing
   
8.30.065   Alternative remedies
   
8.30.070   Violation - penalty
§ 8.30.010 PURPOSE.
   It is declared to be in the public interest to promote the health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the city by providing procedures for the
abatement of nuisances as declared by the Mayor and City Council of the city,
which abatement procedures shall be in addition to all other proceedings
authorized by this code or otherwise by law.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 8.30.015 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. A physically inoperable vehicle.
   ABATEMENT. The demolition, removal, repair, maintenance, construction,
reconstruction, replacement or reconditioning of structures, appliances or
equipment; or the removal, transportation, disposal and treatment of waste and
abandoned materials and equipment capable of harboring, breeding or attracting
rodents or insects or producing odors or blight.
   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER or HEARING OFFICER. Any individual appointed
by the City Manager of the City of San Bernardino, or his or her designee, to
hear the appeal under this chapter.
   AGRICULTURAL GROVES. Any grove of ten or more trees on a parcel or lot.
   ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE. Any condition, instrumentality or machine which is
unsafe and unprotected and thereby dangerous to young children by reason of
their inability to appreciate the peril which exists, and which may reasonably
be expected to attract young children to the premises and risk injury by
playing with, in or on it. ATTRACTIVE NUISANCES may include, but shall not be
limited to:
      (1)   Abandoned and/or broken equipment;
      (2)   Swimming pools being used as fish ponds or other uses contrary to
permitted swimming or other pool uses, subject to state or local regulations
requiring, without limitation, that drains be visible from the water’s surface
and that the water be filtered;
      (3)   Hazardous and/or unmaintained pools, ponds, culverts, excavations;
and
      (4)   Neglected machinery.
   BUILDING. Any structure including, but not limited to, any house, garage,
duplex, apartment, condominium, stock cooperative, mobile home or other
residential structure or any portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented
or leased to be occupied or otherwise is intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy, and any commercial, industrial or other establishment,
warehouse, kiosk or other structures affixed to or upon real property, used for
the purpose of conducting a business, storage or other activity.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT DIRECTOR. The Chief of Police for the City of San
Bernardino, or his or her designee.
   CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL. Any discarded material from the building or
destruction of structures, road and bridges, including concrete, rocks,
asphalt, plasterboard, wood and other related material.
   EXCAVATION. Any wells, shafts, basements, cesspools, septic tanks, fish
ponds and other like or similar conditions more than six inches in diameter and
three feet in depth.
   FOUL. Very offensive to the senses.
   GARBAGE. Any putrescible animal, fish, fowl, food, fruit or vegetable matter
resulting from the cultivation, preparation, storage, handling, decay or
consumption of the substance.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE. Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or
article which is identified or listed by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or appropriate agency of the State of California as a
hazardous waste, as defined in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.1 through 261.33, except that
for purposes of this chapter, hazardous waste also shall include household
waste, as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 261.4(b)(1).
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Mechanically incapable of being driven or prohibited
from being operated on a public street or highway pursuant to Cal. Vehicle
Code, §§ 4000, 5202, 24002 and 40001, concerning license plates, registration,
equipment, safety and related matters.
   NOXIOUS. Hurtful or unwholesome.
   ODOR. Any smell, scent or fragrance.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having legal or equitable
interest in the property.
   PREMISES. Any lot or parcel of land upon which a building is situated,
including any portion thereof improved or unimproved, and adjacent streets,
sidewalks, parkways and parking areas.
   PROPERTY. Any lot or parcel of land, including any alley, sidewalk, parkway
or unimproved public easement.
   REFUSE. Any putrescible and non-putrescible solid waste, except sewerage,
whether combustible or non-combustible and includes garbage and rubbish.
   STAGNANT WATER. Water which is allowed to become stagnant contained in
ditches, pools, ponds, steams excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools,
privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs,
urns, cans, tires, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, roof gutters, tanks of flush
closets, reservoirs, vessels, receptacles of any kind or other containers or
devices which may hold water.
   UNMERCHANTABLE. Unsalable.
   VEHICLE. Any device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved
or drawn upon a highway, or upon water, excepting a device moved exclusively by
human-power, or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   VIOLATOR. Any responsible party, including the landowner, or lessee, tenant
or any other person who had possession or custody of the property.
   WASTE MATTER. Any rubbish or construction material.
   WEEDS. Useless and troublesome plants generally accepted as having no value
and frequently of uncontrolled growth.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 8.30.020 DECLARATION OF NUISANCES.
   It is unlawful and is declared a nuisance for any person owning, leasing,
occupying or having charge or possession of any property and any vehicles
thereon in the city to maintain the property in such a manner that any of the
following conditions are present:
   (A)   The existence of any garbage, rubbish, refuse or waste matter upon the
premises contrary to the provisions of the municipal code;
   (B)   The existence of weeds upon the premises, including public sidewalks,
streets or alleys between said premises and the centerline of any public street
or alley;
   (C)   The existence of overgrown, dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous
trees, and other vegetation, including, but not limited to, dead agricultural
groves which:
      (1)   Are likely to attract rodents, vermin or other nuisances;
      (2)   Constitute a fire hazard; or
      (3)   Is dangerous to the public safety and welfare.
   (D)   Overgrown vegetation, including trees, shrubbery, ground cover, lawns
and decorative plantings, which substantially detract from the aesthetic and
property values of neighboring properties;
   (E)   Any abandoned or discarded furniture, stove, refrigerator, freezer,
sink, toilet, cabinet or other household fixture or equipment visible from a
public right-of-way;
   (F)   The existence of any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
motor vehicle upon the premises contrary to the provisions of the municipal
code;
   (G)   (1)   The storage or parking of certain vehicles as follows:
         (a)   The storage or parking of trucks exceeding the manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds on all areas of all residential
zones, and the storage or parking of other vehicles on the landscaped front and
street side yard setback area of all residential zones, including, but not
limited to, the front lawn areas, contrary to the provisions of the municipal
code; and
      (b)   The storage or parking of vehicles on any unpaved parcel of
property where such vehicle is:
            1.   Likely to disrupt traffic flow in the city;
            2.   Stir up dust from driving on the unimproved surface;
            3.   Negatively impact the aesthetics of the city;
            4.   Allow oils and other unwanted substances to drip onto the
untreated dirt surface; and/or
            5.   Cause traffic obstructions by impeding the line of vision of
drivers at intersections.
      (2)   Vehicles parked in conjunction with a temporary use as permitted
under municipal code are excepted.
   (H)   The outdoor storage of personal property on private property as
follows:
      (1)   Any furniture (except for furniture specifically designed for
outdoor use) on porches, balconies, sun decks, front, side and/or rear yards,
any other personal property not designed for outdoor use and in good working
order;
      (2)   The existence of any hay, straw, lumber, papers or other
substances, junk, packing boxes, recyclable materials, salvage materials,
building/construction materials, equipment; unless necessarily kept or stored
under validly permitted, current construction; appliances, commercial/
industrial machinery and/or equipment (whether operable or inoperable); and
      (3)   Any item causing an unsightly appearance which is visible from the
public right-of-way or sites of neighboring properties or which provides a
harborage for rats and/or other vermin, or creates any other potential health
hazard or nuisance.
   (I)   The outdoor storage of personal property on public property as
follows:
      (1)   The use of public property to store, maintain, place or abandon any
personal property, on any public street, any public sidewalk, any parking lot
or public area, improved or unimproved, any public park, parkway, median or
greenbelt, except as otherwise provided; and
      (2)   Any personal property stored, maintained, placed or abandoned in
violation of this section may be removed and discarded at the discretion of the
Public Works Director, Code Enforcement Director or their designees.
   (J)   Any dangerous or substandard building, whether or not occupied,
abandoned, boarded up or partially destroyed contrary to the provisions of the
California Fire Code and International Fire Code, California Building Standards
Code, Uniform Housing Code, Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
and/or the municipal code;
   (K)   Peeling or blistering paint on any building or structure such that the
condition is plainly visible from a public right-of-way;
   (L)   The existence of loud or unusual noises, or foul or noxious odors
which offend the peace and quiet of persons of ordinary sensibilities and which
interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property and affect the
entire neighborhood or any considerable number of persons;
   (M)   The existence of hazardous substances and waste unlawfully released,
discharged or deposited upon any premises onto any city property;
   (N)   The existence of any stagnant water or water contained in hazardous
and/or unmaintained swimming or other pools which obscure required visibility
and proper filtering;
   (O)   Any vacant commercial or industrial property on which are located
signs related to uses no longer conducted or products no longer sold on the
premises; provided that outdoor advertising displays which are located in
permitted zoning districts or which are otherwise legally permitted are
excepted herefrom;
   (P)   Automobile service stations, and the buildings and premises thereof,
that have been vacant or abandoned for a period in excess of 180 consecutive
days without being reestablished and which have been maintained in such a
condition as to become so defective, unsightly or in such a condition of
deterioration or disrepair that the same cause appreciable diminution of the
property values of surrounding properties, or are materially and economically
detrimental to the neighboring properties and improvements;
   (Q)   Underground or aboveground storage vessels or tanks that have remained
for more than six months after the use of such tanks or vessels ceases;
   (R)   Any attractive nuisance;
   (S)   Any other condition which is contrary to the public peace, health and
safety; and
   (T)   Any other violation of the municipal code.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Building Codes, see Title 15,
Chapters 15.04 and
15.05
§ 8.30.021 SUMMARY/EMERGENCY ABATEMENT.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter with reference to the
abatement of public nuisance, the Code Enforcement Director, Fire Chief, Chief
of Police, City Engineer, Director of Public Works, Building Official or their
designees shall have the authority to immediately cause the abatement of any
public nuisance if it is determined that the nuisance presents an immediate
threat to public health or safety, or an imminent hazard to real or personal
property, in their sole discretion. Any such abatement activity may be
conducted without observance of any notice requirements described in this
chapter. The city is entitled to recover all abatement costs incurred in the
abatement of an imminent threat or hazard as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 8.30.022 SUMMARY/EMERGENCY ABATEMENT POST-ABATEMENT HEARING.
   (A)   Within ten business days, or as soon as reasonably possible under the
circumstances, following any summary abatement action by the city to abate an
immediate threat to public health or safety, or imminent hazard to real or
personal property, the city must provide the owner and any other responsible
person with a “notice of summary abatement.”
   (B)   The notice of summary abatement shall be served in accordance with §
8.30.023 and contain the following information:
      (1)   A brief description of the condition and reasons why it constituted
an imminent threat or hazard;
      (2)   A brief description of the law prohibiting or pertaining to the
imminent threat or hazard;
      (3)   A brief description of the actions the city took to abate the
imminent threat or hazard; and
      (4)   An itemized invoice identifying all nuisance abatement costs
related to the summary abatement. The invoice shall further indicate that any
unpaid amounts may become a lien and special assessment against the property.
   (C)   The city’s determination that a public nuisance constituted an
imminent threat or hazard may be appealed as set forth in §
8.30.030. The invoice of abatement costs may be appealed as set forth in §
8.30.045. Any party to whom an invoice has been issued shall have 45 calendar
days from the date of the invoice to remit full payment of the invoice to the
city. If the owner or other responsible person fails to make timely, full
payment of the abatement costs within 45 days of issuance of the notice of
summary abatement or as ordered by the hearing officer after any appeal, the
city may then proceed to collect its abatement costs in any manner allowed by
law, including as set forth in §
8.30.055.
   (D)   Omission of any of the foregoing provisions in a notice of summary
abatement, whether in whole or in part, or the failure of an owner or
responsible person to receive this document, does not render it defective or
render any proceeding or action pursuant to this chapter invalid.
   (E)   The decision of the hearing officer on the determination of nuisance
is final. Any appeal of the hearing officer’s decision shall be governed by
Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, § 1094.6 or such section as may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 8.30.023 METHOD OF GIVING NOTICE.
   (A)   Any notice required by this chapter may be served in any one of the
following methods:
      (1)   By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or
control of the property;
      (2)   By certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested.
Simultaneously, the same notice may be sent by regular mail addressed to the
owner or person in charge and control of the property, at the address shown on
the last available assessment roll, or as otherwise known. If a notice that is
sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed
effective pursuant to regular mail; provided the notice that was sent by
regular mail is not returned;
      (3)   By posting in a conspicuous place on the premises or abutting
public right-of way; or
      (4)   In the alternative, insertion of a legal advertisement at least
once a week for the period of two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city.
   (B)   The failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive
any notice served in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity
of any proceedings taken under this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 8.30.025 DETERMINATION OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Director, or his or her designee, may determine
that any premises within the city may constitute a public nuisance pursuant to
any provisions of §
8.30.020 and may initiate abatement proceedings pursuant to this chapter. The
Code Enforcement Director, or the authorized representative thereof, shall set
forth in such determination in a notice to abate which shall identify
the premises and state the conditions which may constitute the nuisance and
shall require that such conditions be corrected within such time periods set
forth in the notice to abate.
   (B)   (1)   The notice to abate to the owner or person in control or charge
of the property shall include:
         (a)   The condition or conditions on the premises creating the
nuisance;
         (b)   A reasonable time limit to abate the nuisance; and
         (c)   The right to appeal.
      (2)   The notice shall direct the abatement of the nuisance and refer to
this chapter for particulars.
   (C)   The notice shall be served not less than ten calendar days before the
date of the scheduled abatement. Failure of the owner to accept or otherwise
receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceeding pursuant to
this chapter.
   (D)   OWNER, as used in this chapter, shall mean any person in possession
and also any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest
in said premises, as disclosed by a current title search from any accredited
title company.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 8.30.026 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Whenever the Code Enforcement Director, or designee, intends to abate
a public nuisance by demolition of a building or structure, the city must
comply with the following additional requirements.
      (1)   The notice to abate must contain a statement that the city intends
to abate the nuisance with city personnel or contractors by demolition of a
building or structure if the nuisance conditions are not repaired,
rehabilitated, removed, terminated or demolished within the compliance deadline
set forth in the notice to abate.
      (2)   The city shall serve the notice to abate on all secured lienholders
of record with the County Recorder’s office.
      (3)   Entry onto any real property to abate a public nuisance by
demolition of a building or structure must be pursuant to a warrant or other
order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   The provisions of this section do not apply in cases involving summary
or emergency abatement under §
8.30.021.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 8.30.030 APPEAL.
   (A)   Within ten days from the date of giving notice to abate, the violator
may file an appeal to the determination of the nuisance with the City Clerk.
Such appeal shall be in writing and shall identify the property subject to the
notice to abate. The City Clerk shall then cause the matter to be set for
hearing before a hearing officer contracted by the city to hear such matters.
   (B)   Notice of the date of hearing shall be given in writing. The date of
the hearing shall be no sooner than 15 days from the date when notice of the
hearing is given to the appellant and to the Code Enforcement Division.
   (C)   At the time fixed in the notice, the administrative hearing officer
shall hear the testimony of all competent persons desiring to testify
respecting the condition constituting the nuisance.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine
whether or not a nuisance exists, and if the hearing officer so concludes, he
or she may declare the conditions existing to be a nuisance and direct the
person owning the property upon which the nuisance exists to abate it within
ten days after the date of posting on the premises a notice of the hearing
officer’s order. The hearing officer may amend time to abate the nuisance, if,
in his or her opinion, there exists good cause for the amendment of time to
abate. If the city is the prevailing party, the hearing officer’s decision
shall order the responsible parties to pay the confirmed nuisance abatement
costs to the city within 30 calendar days, and shall specify that any confirmed
nuisance abatement costs not paid within 30 calendar days shall become a lien
and special assessment against the property.
   (E)   The decision of the hearing officer on the determination of nuisance
is final. Any appeal of the hearing officer’s decision shall be governed by
Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, § 1094.6 or such section as may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 8.30.035 TIME LIMIT FOR COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The violator must abate the nuisance within the period of time set
forth in the notice to abate, or, in case of an appeal, within ten days from
the finding of the hearing officer or such longer period as may be determined
by the administrative hearing officer.
   (B)   Unless an emergency situation exists, the violator shall be given at
least ten days to abate the nuisance.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 8.30.040 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   If the nuisance is not abated by the violator within the time limits set
forth in §
8.30.035, the city, by its employees or any hired contractor, may cause the
nuisance to be abated.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 8.30.041 REPORT OF ABATEMENT COSTS.
   (A)   In accordance with this chapter, the city shall serve upon each
responsible party and each interested party an invoice identifying all nuisance
abatement costs related to a nuisance abatement action.
   (B)   Any party to whom an invoice has been issued shall have 45 calendar
days from the date of the invoice to remit full payment of the invoice to the
city. Payment shall be submitted to the city as specified in the invoice. The
invoice shall further indicate that any unpaid amounts may become a lien and
special assessment against the property.
   (C)   The statement shall be accompanied by a notice to the owner that the
cost of abatement may be protested as set forth in §
8.30.045. If the cost is not protested within 15 calendar days after service,
it shall be deemed final.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 8.30.042 RECOVERY OF ATTORNEYS’ FEES AND REPORT OF ATTORNEYS’ FEES.
   (A)   In any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding to
abate a nuisance, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recovery of
attorneys’ fees. The recovery of attorneys’ fees by the prevailing party shall
be limited to those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects,
at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of
its own attorneys’ fees.
   (B)   In no action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding shall an
award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. The City
Attorney’s office shall thereafter cause a report of the action and an accurate
account of costs to be filed with the City Clerk.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 8.30.043 TREBLE DAMAGES.
   Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a
two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a
condition that may be abated in accordance with this chapter, except for
conditions abated pursuant to the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 17980, related
to substandard buildings, the court may order the owner to pay treble the costs
of the abatement.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 8.30.045 HEARING ON NUISANCE ABATEMENT COSTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any responsible party or interested party to whom an invoice has
been issued may, within 15 calendar days from the date of the invoice, request
a hearing to protest the cost of abatement by filing a written request for a
hearing on the abatement costs with the City Clerk.
      (2)   The request for hearing must contain the following information:
         (a)   The requestor’s full legal name;
         (b)   The requestor’s mailing address and telephone number;
         (c)   The amount of nuisance abatement costs disputed; and
         (d)   The specific legal and factual grounds for all disputes of the
invoice and nuisance abatement costs.
   (B)   The failure of any party to properly and timely request a hearing is a
waiver of the right to contest the invoice, a waiver of the right to a hearing,
a failure to exhaust administrative remedies and a bar to any further challenge
to the city’s invoice and nuisance abatement costs.
   (C)   If a hearing is timely and properly requested, the City Clerk shall
cause a hearing to be set before the hearing officer. The city shall provide
notice of the date, time and location of the hearing to all parties at least
ten calendar days before the hearing. At the time fixed for the hearing, the
hearing officer shall hold an informal hearing to consider the invoice and
protests or objections raised by the requestor.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, or within five days thereafter, the
hearing officer shall issue a decision approving, denying or modifying the
amount of the nuisance abatement costs that the city is entitled to recover.
   (E)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall be
served by mail. The decision of the hearing officer on the abatement costs
shall be final. If any cost recovery is upheld, even in part, the city shall be
the prevailing party. If cost recovery is entirely denied, the requesting
parties shall be the prevailing parties.
   (F)   Any appeal of the hearing officer’s decision shall be governed by Cal.
Code of Civil Procedure, § 1094.6, or such section as may be amended from time
to time
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 8.30.050 COUNCIL ACTION.
   (A)   If the property owner does not pay the cost of abating the nuisance
within 30 calendar days after the cost becomes final or the hearing officer
confirms the costs of abatement, the cost shall become a special assessment
against the real property upon which the nuisance was abated. The assessment
shall continue until it is paid, together with interest at the legal maximum
rate computed from the date of confirmation of the statement until payment. The
assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary
municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and
the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary
municipal taxes.
   (B)   The City Council shall adopt a resolution assessing such unpaid costs
of abatement as liens upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown
upon the last available assessment roll.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 8.30.055 IMPOSITION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT LIEN AND NOTICE.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall prepare and file with the County Auditor a
certified copy of the resolution of the City Council assessing the costs of
abatement as a lien on the land, adopted pursuant to the preceding section.
   (B)   Notice of lien shall be mailed by certified mail to the property
owner, if the property owner’s identity can be determined from the County
Assessor’s or County Recorder’s records. The notice shall be given at the time
of imposing the assessment and shall specify that the property may be sold
after three it years by the Tax Collector for unpaid delinquent assessments.
The Tax Collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the
property owner to receive notice.
   (C)   The County Auditor shall enter each assessment on the county tax roll
upon the parcel of land. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and
in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be
subject to the same penalties and procedure and sale in case of delinquency as
is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy,
collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the
special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of
abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for
value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and
attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes
would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien
against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured
roll for collection. The tax collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by
the failure of the property owner to receive notice.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 8.30.056 RECORDING OF NUISANCE ABATEMENT LIEN.
   As an additional remedy, the Code Enforcement Director may cause a nuisance
abatement lien for costs related to abatements, other than dangerous building
abatements, to be recorded with the County Recorder’s office, pursuant to the
provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code, § 38773.1.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 8.30.060 COLLECTION OF COSTS AND ATTORNEYS’ FEES PRIOR TO HEARING.
   The city may accept payment of any amount due at any time prior to the
filing of a certified copy of the City Council resolution assessing the
abatements costs with the County Auditor.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 8.30.065 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
   The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal,
civil or other legal or equitable remedies established by law which may be
pursued to address violations of this code or applicable state codes and the
use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 8.30.070 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   (A)   The owner or other person having charge or control of any such
buildings or premises who maintains any public nuisance defined in this chapter
or who violates an order of abatement made pursuant to §
8.30.030 is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any occupant or lessee in possession of any building or structure
contrary to an order given as provided in this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (C)   No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any representative
of the city or with any representative of a city department or with any person
who owns or holds any estate or interest in a building which has been ordered
to be vacated, repaired, rehabilitated or demolished and removed, or with any
person to whom any such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the
provisions of this code whenever any such representative of the City Council,
representative of the city, purchaser or person having any interest or estate
in the building is engaged in vacating, repairing, rehabilitating or
demolishing and removing any such building pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to
such work as authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
CHAPTER 8.33: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-807, passed 9-18-1991)
CHAPTER 8.35: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1260, passed 12-4-2007)
CHAPTER 8.36: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
8.36.010   Findings
   
8.36.020   Definitions
   
8.36.030   Applicability
   
8.36.040   Chapter not exclusive
   
8.36.050   Administration and enforcement
   
8.36.060   Rights of franchisee to enter private property
   
8.36.070   Assessment of administrative costs
   
8.36.080   Abatement authority
   
8.36.090   Ten-day notice required
   
8.36.100   Public hearing
   
8.36.110   Hearings to be held before hearing officer
   
8.36.120   Reserved
   
8.36.130   Removal of vehicle to scrapyard
   
8.36.140   Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles of removed vehicles
   
8.36.150   Assessment of charges against land
   
8.36.160   Violation - penalty
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on the removal of parked and abandoned vehicles, see Cal.
Vehicle Code, §§ 22650 et seq.
§ 8.36.010 FINDINGS.
   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the state under the Cal. Vehicle Code, §§ 22660 through
22664 to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts
thereof as public nuisances, the Mayor and City Council make the following
findings and declarations: the accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public
property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to
reduce the value of private property; to promote blight and deterioration; to
invite plundering; to create fire hazards; to constitute an attractive nuisance
creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; to create a harborage for
rodents and insects; and to be injurious to the health, safety and general
welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle or part thereof on private or public property, not
including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is a public
nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969; Ord. 3685, passed 11-9-1977)
§ 8.36.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HIGHWAY. A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. HIGHWAY includes
street.
   OWNER OF THE LAND. The owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts
thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.
   OWNER OF THE VEHICLE. The last registered owner and legal owner of record.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Does not include HIGHWAY.
   VEHICLE. A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or
drawn upon a highway except a device moved by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969; Ord. 3685, passed 11-9-1977)
§ 8.36.030 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   A vehicle or a part thereof which is completely enclosed within a
building, in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
   (B)   A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner
on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler,
licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. This exception shall not, however,
authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance, as defined under
provisions of law.
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969; Ord. 3685, passed 11-9-1977; Ord. MC-153, passed
4-20-1982; Ord. MC-636, passed 9-7-1988)
§ 8.36.040 CHAPTER NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be
in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore
or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency
having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969)
§ 8.36.050 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the Code Compliance Director, or his or
her representatives, except that the removal of vehicle(s) or parts(s) thereof
from property may be by any other duly authorized person. Any such authorized
person may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this
chapter to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, obtain information as to the
identity of a vehicle and remove, or cause the removal of, a vehicle part
thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969; Ord. 3685, passed 11-9-1977; Ord. MC-498, passed
2-18-1986; Ord. MC-645, passed 12-7-1988; Ord. MC-1069, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 8.36.060 RIGHTS OF FRANCHISEE TO ENTER PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   When the Mayor and City Council have contracted with or granted a franchise
to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter
upon private property or public property to remove, or cause the removal of, a
vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969)
§ 8.36.070 ASSESSMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
   The Mayor and City Council shall, from time to time, determine and fix an
amount to be assessed as administrative fees under this chapter including fees
for response to demands for information regarding liens imposed hereunder.
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969; Ord. MC-1307, passed 6-2-2009)
§ 8.36.080 ABATEMENT AUTHORITY.
   Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property
within the city, the Superintendent of Public Buildings, or his or her
representatives, under the supervision of the department head, shall have the
authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the
procedure prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969; Ord. 3419, passed 4-19-1974; Ord. MC-498, passed
2-18-1986; Ord. MC-645, passed 12-7-1988)
§ 8.36.090 TEN-DAY NOTICE REQUIRED.
   A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or part
thereof, as a public nuisance shall be issued. Such ten-day notice of intention
to abate shall be mailed by certified mail or registered mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner of the land, as shown on the last equalized assessment
roll, and to the last registered owner and/or legal owner of record of the
vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers
are not available to determine ownership. All notices must identify the
vehicle. Notices mailed to the owner of land must advise that failure to comply
with the notice may result in abatement by the city, and costs being assessed
against the property. All notices must advise that an aggrieved party may
appeal and describe the procedures for filing an appeal.
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969; Ord. 3419, passed 4-19-1974; Ord. 3685, passed
11-9-1977; Ord. MC-498, passed 2-18-1986; Ord. MC-645, passed 12-7-1988; Ord.
MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 8.36.100 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   The owner of the vehicle or owner of the land that is the subject of a
ten-day notice issued under this chapter may appeal the notice to a hearing
officer in the manner provided in
Chapter 9.94.
   (B)   The appeal must be filed within ten days following issuance of the
ten-day notice. If such a request for hearing is not received by the city
within said ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and
remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or
parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing.
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969; Ord. 3267, passed 5-17-1972; Ord. 3419, passed 4-
19-1974; Ord. MC-498, passed 2-18-1986; Ord. MC-645, passed 12-7-1988; Ord. MC-
1070, passed 4-18-2000; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 8.36.110 HEARINGS TO BE HELD BEFORE HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other
action as the hearing officer deems appropriate under the circumstances to
carry out the purpose of this chapter. The hearing officer may delay the time
for removal of the vehicle or part thereof if, in the hearing officer’s
opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing,
the hearing officer may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property, and may
order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of
as hereinafter provided, and may determine the administrative costs and the
cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which
the vehicle or part thereof is located. The order requiring removal shall
include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct
identification number and license number of the vehicle if available at the
site.
   (B)   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the
land without the consent of the land owner and that he or she has not
subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess
costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon
which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from
such landowner.
   (C)   The decision of the hearing officer in an appeal under
Chapter 9.94 is final.
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969; Ord. 3419, passed 4-19-1974; Ord. MC-645, passed
12-7-1988; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 8.36.120 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969; Ord. 3419, passed 4-19-1974; Ord. MC-410, passed
9-18-1984; Ord. MC-645, passed 12-7-1988; Ord. MC-742, passed 9-17-1990; Ord.
MC-1071, passed 4-18-2000; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 8.36.130 REMOVAL OF VEHICLE TO SCRAPYARD.
   Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or part thereof
to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the
decision if such notice is required by §
8.36.110 or 15 days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal
following appeal, the vehicle or part thereof may be disposed of by removal to
a scrapyard or automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed,
it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a
vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or
historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to Cal. Vehicle Code, § 5004, in
which case, the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable.
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969; Ord. 3685, passed 11-9-1977)
§ 8.36.140 NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES OF REMOVED VEHICLES.
   Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof,
notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the
vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to
the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available,
including, but not limited to, the registration card, certificates of ownership
or license plates.
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969; Ord. 3685, passed 11-9-1977)
§ 8.36.150 ASSESSMENT OF CHARGES AGAINST LAND.
   If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged
against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to §
8.36.110 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, or the final
disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the
parcel of land pursuant to the Cal. Gov’t Code, § 38773.5 and shall be
transmitted to the County Auditor for collection. The assessment shall have the
same priority as other city taxes.
(Ord. 2969, passed 1-21-1969)
§ 8.36.160 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, partnership, firm or corporation whether as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the
provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-584, passed 2-17-1987)
CHAPTER 8.38: SIGNS ON VACANT PROPERTIES
Section
   
8.38.010   Signs
   
8.38.020   Signs on unimproved or abandoned property
   
8.38.030   Violation; removal
   
8.38.040   Violation - penalty
§ 8.38.010 SIGNS.
   Any sign, as defined in § 19.60.020, placed after the effective date of this
chapter, on any unimproved or abandoned property within the city limits, shall
display the name, address and telephone number of the person, firm or
corporation responsible for placing the sign.
(Ord. MC-757, passed 11-21-1990)
§ 8.38.020 SIGNS ON UNIMPROVED OR ABANDONED PROPERTY.
   No sign, as defined in § 19.60.020, may be placed or maintained on any
unimproved or abandoned property after the effective date of this chapter, when
such property is in violation of
Chapters 8.18,
8.24,
8.27,
8.30,
8.33 or
8.36.
(Ord. MC-757, passed 11-21-1990; Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
Editor’s note:
   Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015 repealed/deleted Ch. 8.27 and stated that any
remaining provisions of the municipal code that reference it should now be
deemed to instead reference
Ch. 8.30, which it also amended.
§ 8.38.030 VIOLATION; REMOVAL.
   Violation of §
8.38.020 shall allow the city to remove said sign at the cost of the person,
firm or corporation responsible for the sign, after giving 72 hours telephone
notice to said person, firm or corporation.
(Ord. MC-757, passed 11-21-1990)
§ 8.38.040 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates §
8.38.020 is guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is
punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010, in addition to any other civil or administrative remedies provided by
law.
(Ord. MC-757, passed 11-21-1990)
CHAPTER 8.39: SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF NUISANCE VEHICLES
Section
   
8.39.010   Findings, purpose and intent
   
8.39.020   Nuisance vehicles
   
8.39.030   Right, title and interest in vehicle
   
8.39.040   Process
   
8.39.050   Receipts
   
8.39.060   Evidence
   
8.39.070   Forfeiture
   
8.39.080   Innocent parties; return of vehicle
   
8.39.090   Interest claim
   
8.39.100   Alternative settlement procedures
   
8.39.110   Sale of vehicles
   
8.39.120   Non-exclusive remedy
   
8.39.130   Severability
§ 8.39.010 FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The Mayor and City Council has determined that persons who operate vehicles
and use them to illegally deposit, discard, dump and/or place garbage, rubbish,
recyclable discards and/or green waste; bring decay; and cause nuisances to
local neighborhoods where they so deposit, discard, dump and/or place such
matter. The Mayor and City Council has further determined that seizing the
vehicles of persons who so illegally deposit, discard, dump and/or place such
garbage, rubbish, recyclable discards and/or green waste in the city will deter
said nuisances from occurring if their vehicles are subject to seizure and
forfeiture. The Mayor and City Council finds that there is a need to provide
for the abatement of such nuisance vehicles.
§ 8.39.020 NUISANCE VEHICLES.
   (A)   Any vehicle used to illegally deposit, discard, dump and/or place
garbage, rubbish, recyclable discards or green waste in violation of §
8.24.070(C) is declared a nuisance vehicle, and the vehicle shall be subject to
seizure and forfeiture as provided in this chapter. GARBAGE, RUBBISH,
RECYCLABLE DISCARDS and GREEN WASTE shall be defined as set forth in §
8.24.060. Any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or employee, either
for himself or herself or any other person, or for any body corporate, or as an
officer or agent for a corporation, or otherwise, who owns, leases, possesses,
conducts, uses or maintains any vehicle (hereinafter referred to as “vehicle”),
used for any of the purposes or acts set forth in this section, is guilty of a
nuisance.
   (B)   In the event that any provision of this chapter, or any part thereof,
or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is, for any reason,
held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by a court of
competent jurisdiction on its face or as applied, such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter, or any part thereof,
or any application thereof to any person or circumstance or of said provision
as applied to any other person or circumstance. It is declared to be the
legislative intent of the city that this chapter would have been adopted had
such unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective provision not been included
herein.
(Ord. MC-1235, passed 10-3-2006)
§ 8.39.030 RIGHT, TITLE AND INTEREST IN VEHICLE.
   All right, title and interest in any vehicle described in §
8.39.020 shall vest in the city upon commission of the act giving rise to the
nuisance under this chapter.
§ 8.39.040 PROCESS.
   (A)   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under this chapter may be seized by any
peace officer upon process issued by any court having jurisdiction over the
vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Under this chapter, seizure without process may be made if any
of the following situations exist:
         (a)   The seizure is incident to an arrest or a search pursuant to a
search warrant; or
         (b)   There is probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in
violation of this chapter.
      (2)   All seized vehicles shall be towed pursuant to this section.
§ 8.39.050 RECEIPTS.
   Receipts for vehicles seized pursuant to this chapter shall be delivered to
any person arrested out of whose possession such vehicle was seized, in
accordance with Cal. Penal Code, § 1412.
§ 8.39.060 EVIDENCE.
   Property seized pursuant to §
8.39.040, where appropriate, may be held for evidence. The City Attorney shall
institute and maintain the proceedings pursuant to §
8.39.070.
§ 8.39.070 FORFEITURE.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (H) below or §
8.39.100, if the City Attorney determines that the factual circumstances
warrant that the vehicle described in §
8.39.020 is subject for forfeiture, the City Attorney shall file a petition for
forfeiture with the Superior Court of the county.
   (B)   A petition for forfeiture under this section shall be filed as soon as
practicable, but in any case within six months of the seizure of the vehicle
which is subject to forfeiture.
   (C)   Within 30 days from the seizure, the City Attorney shall cause a
notice of the seizure and of the intended forfeiture proceedings, as well as
notice stating that any interested party may file a verified claim with the
Superior Court in the county, to be served by personal delivery or by
registered mail upon any person who has an interest in the vehicle. Whenever a
notice is delivered pursuant to this section, it shall be accompanied by a
claim form as described in §
8.39.090 and directions for the filing and service of a claim. Notice shall
also be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county.
      (2)   The City Attorney shall provide notice of the proceedings under
this section, including the following information:
         (a)   A description of the vehicle;
         (b)   The date and place of seizure;
         (c)   The violation of law alleged with respect to forfeiture of the
property; and
         (d)   The instruction for filing and serving a claim with the City
Attorney pursuant to §
8.39.090 and time limits for filing a claim.
   (D)   An investigation shall be made by the City Police Department as to any
claimant to the vehicle whose right, title, interest or lien is of record in
the Department of Motor Vehicles or appropriate federal agency. If the City
Police Department finds that any person, other than the registered owner, is
the legal owner thereof, and such ownership did not arise subsequent to the
date and time of arrest or notification of the forfeiture proceedings or
seizure of the vehicle, it shall immediately send a notice to the legal owner
at his or her address appearing on the records of the Department of Motor
Vehicles or appropriate federal agency.
   (E)   All notices shall set forth the time within which a claim of interest
in the vehicle seized or subject to forfeiture is required to be filed pursuant
to §
8.39.090.
   (F)   With respect to a vehicle described in §
8.39.020 for which forfeiture is sought and as to which forfeiture is
contested, the city shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the
evidence that the vehicle was used as set forth in §
8.39.020. Trial shall be before the court or by jury. The presiding judge of
the Superior Court shall assign the action brought pursuant to this chapter for
trial.
   (G)   Upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was
used for any of the purposes set forth in §
8.39.020, the court shall declare the vehicle a nuisance and order that the
vehicle be seized, if not previously seized and held by the Police Department,
forfeited and sold and the proceeds distributed in accordance with this
chapter.
   (H)   If no claims are filed, the City Attorney shall prepare a written
declaration of forfeiture of the vehicle to the court and dispose of the
vehicle in accordance with this chapter. A written declaration of forfeiture
signed by the City Attorney under this section shall be deemed to provide good
and sufficient title to the forfeited vehicle. The City Attorney shall provide
a copy of the declaration of forfeiture to any person who received notice of
the forfeiture proceedings.
   (I)   If a claim is timely filed, then the City Attorney shall file a
petition for forfeiture pursuant to this section within 30 days of the receipt
of the claim.
§ 8.39.080 INNOCENT PARTIES; RETURN OF VEHICLE.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the City Police Department
shall return a seized vehicle upon the filing of a timely claim pursuant to §
8.39.090 and upon a showing by the claimant that:
   (A)   The vehicle is owned by two or more persons and there is a community
property interest in the vehicle by a person other than the person who used or
maintained the vehicle to illegally deposit, discard, dump and/or place
garbage, rubbish, recyclable discards and/or green waste, and the vehicle is
the sole vehicle available to the person’s immediate family;
   (B)   The vehicle is owned by the employer of the person who used or
maintained the vehicle for illegally depositing, discarding, dumping and/or
placing garbage, rubbish, recyclable discards and/or green waste, and the
employer files and serves on the City Attorney a declaration or affidavit under
penalty of perjury that he or she had no knowledge of said illegal activity; or
   (C)   The vehicle is owned by a rental car agency with a duly executed
contract with the person who used or maintained the vehicle for illegally
depositing, discarding, dumping and/or placing said garbage, rubbish,
recyclable discards and/or green waste.
§ 8.39.090 INTEREST CLAIM.
   Any person claiming an interest in a vehicle seized pursuant to §
8.39.020 must, at any time within ten days from the date of the notice of
seizure, file with the Superior Court of the State of California, County of San
Bernardino, San Bernardino District, a claim, verified in accordance with the
Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, § 446, stating his or her interest in the
vehicle. An endorsed copy of the claim shall be served by the claimant on the
City Attorney within ten days of the filing of the claim.
   (A)   If a verified claim is filed, the forfeiture proceeding shall be set
for hearing on a day not less than 30 days therefrom.
   (B)   The hearing shall be before the court or by jury.
   (C)   The provisions of the California Code of Civil Procedure shall apply
to proceedings under this chapter unless otherwise inconsistent with the
provisions or procedures set forth in this chapter. However, in proceedings
under this chapter, there shall be no joinder of actions; coordination of
actions, except for forfeiture proceedings; or cross-complaints, and the issues
shall be limited strictly to the questions related to this chapter.
§ 8.39.100 ALTERNATIVE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any person, or his or her servant, agent or employee, who owns,
leases, conducts, uses or maintains any vehicle for illegally depositing,
discarding, dumping and/or placing garbage, rubbish, recyclable discards and/or
green waste, and whose vehicle has been seized in accordance with this chapter
may request to execute a voluntary settlement agreement with the city for the
return of the vehicle. However, nothing in this section shall require the city
to follow these alternative settlement procedures.
   (B)   Such request shall be made in writing to the City Attorney. The
minimum amount of the settlement agreement shall be sufficient to cover all of
the city’s reasonable administrative costs, including attorneys’ fees and
personnel time for the seizure and forfeiture action. The costs, salary and
expenses of the City Attorney and members of the City Attorney’s office in
enforcing this chapter on behalf of the city shall be considered as “attorneys’
fees” for the purposes of this section. The executed settlement agreement shall
be accompanied by the appropriate settlement fee amount in the form of a money
order, cash or cashier’s check. All settlement funds shall be distributed as
set forth in §
8.39.110(B) and (C).
§ 8.39.110 SALE OF VEHICLES.
   In all cases where a vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter is forfeited to
the city, the vehicle shall be sold by the Police Department, its agent or
designee, and the proceeds of the sale shall be distributed and appropriated as
follows:
   (A)   To the bona fide or innocent purchaser, conditional vendor, mortgagee
or lien holder of the vehicle, if any, up to the amount of his or her interest
in the vehicle, when the court or City Attorney declaring the forfeiture and
sale of the vehicle orders a distribution to that person;
   (B)   To the city for all expenditures made or incurred by it in connection
with the publication of the notices set forth in this chapter, and sale of the
vehicle, including expenditures for any necessary repairs, storage or
transportation of any vehicle seized under this chapter;
   (C)   The remaining funds shall be placed in the General Fund of the city,
subject to appropriate accounting controls and financial audits for all
deposits and expenditures; and
   (D)   All the funds placed in the General Fund, pursuant to this chapter,
shall not supplant any funds that would, in the absence of this chapter, be
made available to support the law enforcement and prosecutorial efforts of the
Police Department or the City Attorney’s office.
§ 8.39.120 NON-EXCLUSIVE REMEDY.
   This chapter is not the exclusive regulation or penalty for the illegal
depositing, discarding, dumping and/or placing of garbage, rubbish, recyclable
discards and/or green waste. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent
the City Attorney from commencing a civil action to abate a nuisance in
addition to, alternatively to or in conjunction with the proceeding set forth
in this chapter, nor shall anything in this chapter be deemed to prevent the
city from commencing a criminal action with respect to the nuisance in addition
to, alternatively to or in conjunction with the proceedings set forth in this
chapter, or other ordinance, statute or state law.
§ 8.39.130 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter is determined by any court of competent
jurisdiction, or by any federal or state agency having jurisdiction over its
subject matter, to be invalid and in conflict with any paramount federal or
state law or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is determined by that
court or agency to require modification in order to conform to the requirements
of that paramount law or regulation, then that provision will be deemed a
separate, distinct and independent part of this chapter, and such determination
will not affect the validity and enforceability of any other provisions. If
that paramount federal or state law or regulation is subsequently repealed or
amended so that the provision of this chapter determined to be invalid or
subject to modification is no longer in conflict with that law or regulation,
then that provision will again become effective and will thereafter be binding.
(Ord. MC-1177, passed 8-17-2004)
CHAPTER 8.42: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-613, passed 12-21-1987)
CHAPTER 8.45: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-613, passed 12-21-1987)
CHAPTER 8.48: HOTELS AND LODGING HOUSES
Section
   
8.48.010   Register required
   
8.48.020   Registration of guests required
   
8.48.030   Violation - penalty
§ 8.48.010 REGISTER REQUIRED.
   Every hotel and lodging house keeper shall, at all times, keep a register in
which the name of each lodger or person renting or occupying a room shall be
entered, together with the address of such person. The register shall be open,
at all times, to the inspection of the police and to all authorized officials
of the city.
(Ord. 442, passed 8-15-10)
§ 8.48.020 REGISTRATION OF GUESTS REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any hotel keeper or lodging house keeper to rent any room
to any person, or allowing or permitting any person to occupy any room, except
such person so renting or occupying such room shall first register his or her
name and address in the register kept for that purpose.
(Ord. 442, passed 8-15-10)
§ 8.48.030 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 442, passed 8-15-10; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 8.50: VENEREAL DISEASES
Section
   
8.50.010   Control of venereal diseases
   
8.50.020   Administration
   
8.50.030   Rules and regulations
   
8.50.040   Violation - penalty
   
8.50.050   Validity
   
8.50.060   Supplementation of state law
§ 8.50.010 CONTROL OF VENEREAL DISEASES.
   (A)   In order to supplement state legislation and to control the spread of
infectious venereal disease in the city, pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety
Code, § 3194, certain arrested persons reasonably believed to be infected with
an infectious venereal disease and certain other persons not arrested but
reasonably believed to be so infected may be ordered to report to the County
Department of Public Health or to a physician and undergo examination and
testing for infectious venereal disease, and to provide evidence to the city of
having had such examination and testing.
   (B)   When, in the judgment of an authorized individual, it is necessary to
protect the public health, a person in either of the following categories may
be reasonably believed to have an infectious venereal disease:
      (1)   (a)   Any person who is arrested for an offense in the nature of
solicitation or prostitution of the type punishable under Cal. Penal Code, §
647:
            1.   For solicitation in prostitution related cases; or
            2.   For prostitution.
         (b)   Any person who is convicted of any such offense.
      (2)   Any person who, within the past 12 months, has had any such
infectious venereal disease, or has been convicted of any offense of the kind
herein specified within 12 months past and who fails to present satisfactory
evidence of examination and testing for infectious venereal disease, and who is
reasonably believed to be engaged in any activity in the nature of prostitution
or solicitation.
   (C)   A person in the foregoing categories who is reasonably believed to
have an infectious venereal disease may be ordered in writing by the County
Director of the Department of Public Health (hereinafter referred to as “health
officer”), his or her authorized deputy or any city employee designated by the
Mayor and approved by the health officer, to report to either his or her own
physician, the County Department of Public Health or an authorized physician
retained by the city, if any, at that person’s option, and to be examined and
tested for the purpose of determining whether such person is, in fact, infected
with an infectious venereal disease. Each such person shall submit to such
examination and testing as are necessary and are authorized by law and shall
permit specimens to be taken for laboratory analysis. The provisions hereof are
for health purposes and shall not be utilized as, or construed to be, a penalty
or punishment.
   (D)   If any such person is found to have an infectious venereal disease of
a type which is amenable to treatment, he or she shall be referred for such
treatment as is consented to or is otherwise authorized by law. If such disease
is not amenable to treatment, such person shall be referred for counseling
under rules of the health officer.
   (E)   Examination and testing shall occur not later than ten days after the
arrest, service of an order to be examined for infectious venereal disease or
release from custody, whichever last occurs. Within ten days after such
examination and testing, each person ordered to be examined for infectious
venereal disease shall obtain a medical report setting forth the results of
examination and testing for infectious venereal disease and shall deliver or
transmit the report to the health officer and, additionally, shall provide
evidence of having had such examination and testing to the city or county
issuing the order, which evidence shall not be publicly disclosed pursuant to
Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 7927.700, 7927.705, 7922.000 or 7922.540(a) or other law.
(Ord. MC-209, passed 9-20-1982)
Editor’s note:
   Medical records may be exempt under Cal. Gov’t Code, § 7927.700 (2023)
(formerly Cal. Gov’t Code, § 6254(c)) and various other statutes that do not
require disclosure of personnel, medical or similar files which would
constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.
§ 8.50.020 ADMINISTRATION.
   The health officer, his or her authorized deputy and any city employee
designated by the Mayor and approved by the health officer under §
8.50.010(C) are authorized and empowered to implement the purposes of §
8.50.010 by personally serving, upon any person reasonably believed to have an
infectious venereal disease, an order for examination and testing incident to
an arrest or notice to appear for the charge of prostitution or solicitation of
the type punishable under Cal. Penal Code, § 647(a) or (b), or incident to
other activity as set forth in §
8.50.010(B)(1) or (B)(2).
(Ord. MC-209, passed 9-20-1982)
§ 8.50.030 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The health officer may adopt, amend and rescind rules and regulations to
carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter and to govern
administrative procedures hereunder. These rules and regulations shall be
consistent with this chapter and other applicable law.
(Ord. MC-209, passed 9-20-1982)
§ 8.50.040 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person having been served with an order to present himself or herself
for examination and testing for infectious venereal disease who fails to
present himself or herself for such examination and testing in the manner and
within the time specified, or who violates any other order issued pursuant to §
8.50.010, or any other provision of this chapter, is guilty of an infraction,
which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions
of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-209, passed 9-20-1982; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 8.50.050 VALIDITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is,
for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of a
court of competent jurisdiction or conflicts with any state law or regulation,
such decision or such conflict shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of the ordinance. The Council declares that it would have passed this
chapter and each section, division, sentence, clause or phrase thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, division, clauses or
phrases thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional or might conflict with
any state law or regulation.
(Ord. MC-209, passed 9-20-1982)
§ 8.50.060 SUPPLEMENTATION OF STATE LAW.
   This chapter is enacted with the intention of supplementing provisions of
the California Health and Safety Code and California Administrative Code
concerning the control of venereal disease by local health officers and any
provision hereof which might conflict with such state codes shall be
interpreted to comply with and as subordinate to such state codes. The
provisions hereof have been enacted after consultation with and the approval of
the County Director of Public Health. The need of, and rational basis for, this
chapter have been established and based upon statistical evidence provided by
the County Department of Public Health and deductions therefrom, studies and
programs in Colorado Springs and Denver, Colorado, and elsewhere, and the
successful results of a similar experimental program in operation since 1976
under the jurisdiction of the Department of Public Health of the County of
Monterey with the active assistance of the State Department of Health Services.
(Ord. MC-209, passed 9-20-1982)
CHAPTER 8.51: MUFFLERS
Section
   
8.51.010   Muffler required
   
8.51.020   Violation - penalty
§ 8.51.010 MUFFLER REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use, run or
operate any stationary engine driven by means of internal combustion of gases
therein within the city without placing upon the exhaust thereof a muffler or
other device so as to silence the noise or report caused by the escaping of
such gases from and through such exhaust.
(Ord. 465, passed 9-5-11)
§ 8.51.020 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is
guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 465, passed 9-5-11; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 8.54: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
8.54.010   Purpose and intent
   
8.54.020   Prohibited acts
   
8.54.030   Issuance of written notice and impoundment
   
8.54.040   Cost recovery for second response
   
8.54.050   Controlled hours of operation
   
8.54.060   Exemptions
   
8.54.070   Disturbances from construction activity
   
8.54.080   Violation - penalty
   
8.54.090   Severability
§ 8.54.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the purpose and intent of these regulations to establish
communitywide noise standards. It is further the purpose of these regulations
to recognize that the existence of excessive noise within the city is a
condition which is detrimental to the health, safety, welfare and quality of
life of the citizens and shall be regulated in the public interest.
   (B)   In furtherance of the foregoing purpose, it is found and declared as
follows:
      (1)   The making, creation or maintenance of such loud, unnecessary,
unnatural or unusual noises that are prolonged, unusual, annoying, disturbing
and unnatural in their time, place and use are a detriment to public health,
comfort, convenience, safety, general welfare and the peace and quiet of the
city and its inhabitants; and
      (2)   The public interest and necessity of the provisions and
prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of
legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that
the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of, and for the purpose of, securing and promoting the public health,
comfort, convenience, safety, general welfare and property, and the peace and
quiet of the city and its inhabitants.
(Ord. MC-1246, passed 5-23-2007; Ord. 1925, passed 11-6-1951)
§ 8.54.020 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the following activities:
   (A)   Sounding any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus
or other motor vehicle in any other manner or circumstances or for any other
purpose than required or permitted by the California Vehicle Code, or other
laws, for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time;
   (B)   Racing the engine of any motor vehicle while the vehicle is not in
motion, except when necessary to do so in the course of repairing, adjusting or
testing the same;
   (C)   Operating or permitting the use of any motor vehicle on any public
right-of-way or public place or on private property within a residential zone
for which the exhaust muffler, intake muffler or any other noise abatement
device has been modified or changed in a manner such that the noise emitted by
the motor vehicle is increased above that emitted by the vehicle as originally
manufactured;
   (D)   Using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other sound-
amplification or production equipment for producing or reproducing sound in
such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet or comfort of neighboring persons,
or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for the convenient hearing
of the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or other enclosure in
which such machine or device is operated, and who are voluntary listeners
thereto and that is:
      (1)   Plainly audible across property boundaries;
      (2)   Plainly audible through partitions common to two residences within
a building;
      (3)   Plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the
source of the music or sound between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; or
      (4)   Plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in any direction from the
source of the music or sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
   (E)   The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any
fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or any motor vehicle
burglar alarm, except for emergency purposes or for testing, unless such alarm
is terminated within 15 minutes of activation;
   (F)   Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing in a loud and boisterous
manner on the public streets so as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of
persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or
neighborhood;
   (G)   The keeping of any animal, fowl or bird which by causing frequent or
long continued noise disturbs the comfort, quiet or repose of any person or
neighborhood;
   (H)   The unnecessary or excessive blowing of whistles, sounding of horns,
ringing of bells or use of signaling devices by operators of trains, motor
trucks and other transportation equipment;
   (I)   The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with the
loading or unloading of motor trucks and other vehicles;
   (J)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which
disturbs the peace and quiet of any considerable number of persons or
neighborhood;
   (K)   The doing of automobile, automotive body or fender repair work or
other work on metal objects and metal parts in a residential district so as to
cause loud and excessive noise which disturbs the peace, quiet and repose of
any person occupying adjoining or closely situated property or neighborhood;
   (L)   The operation or use between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of
any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammers, derrick, steam or electric
hoist, power driven saw or any other tool or apparatus, the use of which is
attended by loud and excessive noise, except with the approval of the city;
   (M)   Creating excessive noise adjacent to any school, church, court or
library while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital or care facility,
which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which
disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital; provided conspicuous signs
are displayed in such streets indicating the presence of a school, institution
of learning, church, court or hospital; and
   (N)   Making or knowingly and unreasonably permitting to be made any
unreasonably loud, unnecessary or unusual noise that disturbs the comfort,
repose, health, peace and quiet, or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any
reasonable person of normal sensitivity. The characteristics and conditions
that may be considered in determining whether this section has been violated
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The level of noise;
      (2)   The level of background noise;
      (3)   The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities;
      (4)   The nature and zoning of the areas within which the noise emanates;
      (5)   The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise
emanates;
      (6)   The time of day or night the noise occurs;
      (7)   The duration of the noise;
      (8)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and
      (9)   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or non-commercial
activity.
(Ord. MC-1246, passed 5-23-2007; Ord. 2102, passed 4-3-1956; Ord. 1925, passed
11-6-1951)
§ 8.54.030 ISSUANCE OF WRITTEN NOTICE AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Any officer who encounters a violation of this section may issue
a written notice to the responsible person demanding immediate abatement of the
violation. The written notice shall inform the recipient that a second
violation of the same provision within a 72-hour period may result in the
issuance of a criminal citation, the imposition of criminal and civil penalties
and confiscation and impoundment, as evidence of the components that are
amplifying or transmitting the prohibited noise.
      (2)   (a)   RESPONSIBLE PERSON means:
            1.   Any person who owns, leases or is lawfully in charge of the
property or motor vehicle where the noise violation takes place; or
            2.   Any person who owns or controls the source of the noise or
violation.
         (b)   If the RESPONSIBLE PERSON is a minor, then the parent or
guardian who has custody of the child at the time of the violation shall be the
RESPONSIBLE PERSON who is liable under this chapter.
   (B)   Any officer who encounters a second violation of this chapter within a
72-hour period following the issuance of a written notice is empowered to
confiscate and impound, as evidence, any or all of the components amplifying or
transmitting the sound. The immediate confiscation of a motor vehicle to which
a component is attached may be made if the same may not be removed without
causing harm to the vehicle or component.
   (C)   Any person claiming legal ownership of the items confiscated and
impounded under this chapter may request the return of the item by filing a
written request with the Police Department within seven calendar days of the
confiscation. Such requests shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures adopted by the Department.
(Ord. MC-1246, passed 5-23-2007; Ord. MC-649, passed 1-4-1989; Ord. 1925,
passed 11-6-1951)
§ 8.54.040 COST RECOVERY FOR SECOND RESPONSE.
   (A)   Whenever any officer issues a written notice to a responsible person
to discontinue a noise violation, the responsible person shall be liable for
the actual cost of each subsequent response required to abate the violation
within 72 hours of the issuance of the written warning.
   (B)   The bill for the response charge shall be served upon the responsible
person within 30 days after the violation. If the responsible person has no
last known business or residence address, the location of the violation shall
be deemed to be the proper address for service. The bill shall include a notice
of the right of the person being charged to request a hearing to dispute the
imposition of the response charge or the amount of the charge.
   (C)   The response charge shall be deemed to be a civil debt to the city.
(Ord. MC-1246, passed 5-23-2007; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. 1925,
passed 11-6-1951)
§ 8.54.050 CONTROLLED HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the following activities
other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. in residential zones
and other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. in all other zones:
   (A)   Operate or permit the use of powered model vehicles and planes;
   (B)   Load or unload any vehicle, or operate or permit the use of dollies,
carts, forklifts or other wheeled equipment that causes any impulsive sound,
raucous or unnecessary noise within 1,000 feet of a residence;
   (C)   Operate or permit the use of domestic power tools, or machinery or any
other equipment or tool in any garage, workshop, house or any other structure;
   (D)   Operate or permit the use of gasoline or electric powered leaf
blowers, such as commonly used by gardeners and other persons for cleaning
lawns, yards, driveways, gutters and other property;
   (E)   Operate or permit the use of privately operated street/parking lot
sweepers or vacuums, except that emergency work and/or work necessitated by
unusual conditions may be performed with the written consent of the City
Manager;
   (F)   Operate or permit the use of electrically operated compressor, fan and
other similar devices.
   (G)   Operate or permit the use of any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle
weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds, or of any auxiliary equipment
attached to such a vehicle, including, but not limited to, refrigerated truck
compressors for a period longer than 15 minutes in any hour while the vehicle
is stationary and on a public right-of-way or public space except when movement
of said vehicle is restricted by other traffic; and
   (H)   Repair, rebuild, reconstruct or dismantle any motor vehicle or other
mechanical equipment or devices in a manner so as to be plainly audible across
property lines.
(Ord. MC-1246, passed 5-23-2007)
§ 8.54.060 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following activities and noise sources shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   The use of horns, sirens or other signaling or warning devices by
persons vested with legal authority to use the same, and in pursuit of their
lawful duties, such as on ambulances, fire, police or other governmental or
official equipment;
   (B)   Such noises as are an accompaniment and effect of a lawful business,
commercial or industrial enterprise carried on in an area zoned for that
purpose, except where there is evidence that such noise is a nuisance and that
such a nuisance is a result of the employment of unnecessary and injurious
methods of operation;
   (C)   Activities conducted on the grounds of any public or private school
during regular hours of operation;
   (D)   Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting and
entertainment events provided said events are authorized by the city;
   (E)   Activities conducted at public spaces during regular hours of
operation;
   (F)   Any mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment used, related to or
connected with emergency machinery, vehicle or work;
   (G)   Construction, repair or excavation necessary for the immediate
preservation of life or property;
   (H)   Construction, operation, maintenance and repairs of equipment,
apparatus or facilities of park and recreation departments, public work
projects or essential public services and facilities, including, but not
limited to, trash collection and those of public utilities subject to the
regulatory jurisdiction of the State Public Utilities Commission;
   (I)   Construction, repair or excavation work performed pursuant to a valid
written agreement with the city, or any of its political subdivisions, which
provides for noise mitigation measures;
   (J)   Any activity to the extent that regulation thereof has been preempted
by state or federal law; and
   (K)   Sounds generated in connection with speech or communication protected
by the U.S. Constitution or the California Constitution, except to the extent
such sounds are subject to permissible time, place and manner restrictions.
(Ord. MC-1246, passed 5-23-2007)
§ 8.54.070 DISTURBANCES FROM CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.
   No person shall be engaged or employed or cause any other person to be
engaged or employed in any work of construction, erection, alteration, repair,
addition, movement, demolition or improvement to any building or structure
except within the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(Ord. MC-1246, passed 5-23-2007)
§ 8.54.080 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction or a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-1246, passed 5-23-2007)
§ 8.54.090 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable and, if any sentence, section
or other part of this chapter should be found to be invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect the remaining provisions, and the remaining provisions shall
continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. MC-1246, passed 5-23-2007)
CHAPTER 8.57: SOUND VEHICLES
Section
   
8.57.010   Definitions
   
8.57.020   Exclusions and exceptions
   
8.57.030   Sound vehicles prohibited in certain places
   
8.57.040   Registration required
   
8.57.050   Filing changes in application
   
8.57.060   Registration and identification
   
8.57.070   Regulation for use
   
8.57.080   Commercial advertising by sound truck prohibited
   
8.57.090   Violation - penalty
§ 8.57.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Includes the singular and the plural and also means and includes any
person, firm, corporation, association, club, partnership, society or any other
form of association or organization.
   SOUND VEHICLE. Any vehicle which carries or is equipped with any instrument
or device for the production or reproduction of music, spoken words or other
sounds, or any loudspeaker, or other sound-amplifying device designed to
enlarge the volume of sound produced by any instrument or by the human voice,
which instrument or device is used, or intended to be used, for the purpose of
advertising or calling attention to any article, thing or event, or for the
purpose of addressing the public or of attracting the attention of the public,
along or upon the public streets or ways along which such vehicle travels.
(Ord. 2096, passed 2-21-1956)
§ 8.57.020 EXCLUSIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   The definitions set forth in §
8.57.010 shall not be deemed to include:
   (A)   Vehicles used only in a parade conducted pursuant to a permit issued
by the City Council;
   (B)   A vehicle equipped with a siren or horn designed and used for the
purpose of warning traffic because of such equipment or use, nor any vehicle
operated by any governmental agency within the course of its public functions;
and
   (C)   Persons who are licensed by the city to sell goods, wares and
merchandise from vehicles and whose vehicles are equipped with sound apparatus
emitting music only; provided the sound of such music does not exceed 90
decibels measured at a distance of ten feet from the speaker of the apparatus
in that area of the city between Mt. Vernon Avenue and “E” Street and Marshall
Boulevard and the west city limits thereof and 95 decibels elsewhere in the
city.
(Ord. 2096, passed 2-21-1956)
§ 8.57.030 SOUND VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive, operate, propel or park any sound
vehicle with the sound-making device, sound-amplifying device or loudspeaker
thereof in use or operation:
   (A)   Within 300 feet of any hospital or school, at any time;
   (B)   Upon any public street or way between the hours of 6:30 p.m. and 9:00
a.m. of the following day;
   (C)   Upon any public street or way on any Sunday;
   (D)   Upon Arrowhead, “D,” “E” and “F’ Streets between Second Street and
Sixth Street, inclusive, including both sides of the street;
   (E)   Upon Third, Court, Fourth, Fifth and Church Streets between Arrowhead
and “F” Streets, inclusive, including both sides of the street; and
   (F)   Upon Highland Avenue between Sierra Way and “I” Street, including both
sides of the street.
(Ord. 2096, passed 2-21-1956; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 8.57.040 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to use or cause to be used a sound
vehicle with its sound-amplifying equipment in operation for non-commercial
purposes in the city before filing a registration statement with the City Clerk
in writing.
   (B)   This registration statement shall be filed in duplicate not less than
seven days nor more than 30 days before the date of the proposed use of such
vehicle and shall include the following information:
      (1)   Name, home address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   Business address, telephone number and nature of applicant’s
business or the organization which he or she represents;
      (3)   Make of vehicle and license and motor numbers thereof; and a
description of the vehicle to be used;
      (4)   Name, address and telephone number of the legal and registered
owner of the vehicle;
      (5)   Name, address and telephone number of person or persons who will be
present and in control or in direct charge of the vehicle;
      (6)   Name, address and telephone number of all persons who will use or
operate such vehicle as driver, speaker or sound operator;
      (7)   The general purpose, nature and type of program which will be used;
      (8)   A general statement as to the route and section or sections of the
city in which the vehicle will be used;
      (9)   The proposed hours of operation of the vehicle;
      (10)   The number and designation of the days, weeks or months of
proposed operation and use of such vehicles;
      (11)   A specific description of the sound-amplifying equipment to be
used;
      (12)   The minimum and maximum sound-producing power of the sound-
amplifying equipment;
      (13)   The wattage and voltage capacity of the sound-amplifying
equipment;
      (14)   The volume range in decibels of the sound which can be produced by
said sound-amplifying equipment;
      (15)   The approximate minimum and maximum distances for which sound may
be thrown from the vehicle;
      (16)   The address and time where and when such vehicle may be inspected;
      (17)   The size and type of sign to be displayed and a description of its
subject; and
      (18)   Each application shall have attached thereto three photographs of
not less than four by five inches in size showing the front, sides and back of
the vehicle, with all exterior equipment and signs clearly visible on said
photographs.
(Ord. 2096, passed 2-21-1956; Ord. 3300, passed 10-24-1972; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985)
§ 8.57.050 FILING CHANGES IN APPLICATION.
   Upon any change in the information as to any matter set forth in the
application, the applicant shall, within 48 hours after such change, file an
amended application. An amended application filed within five days before the
proposed using date shall automatically postpone the using date for an
additional 30 days.
(Ord. 2096, passed 2-21-1956)
§ 8.57.060 REGISTRATION AND IDENTIFICATION.
   The City Clerk shall return to each applicant under §
8.57.040 one copy of the registration statement duly certified by the City
Clerk as a correct copy of the application. The certified copy of the
application shall be in the possession of any person operating the sound
vehicle at all times while the sound vehicle’s sound-amplifying equipment is in
operation, and the copy shall be promptly displayed and shown to any police
officer of the city upon request.
(Ord. 2096, passed 2-21-1956)
§ 8.57.070 REGULATION FOR USE.
   Non-commercial use of sound vehicles with sound-amplifying equipment in
operation in the city shall be subject to the following regulations.
   (A)   The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.
   (B)   Operation is permitted for a period of four hours each day except
Sundays when no operation shall be permitted.
   (C)   The permitted hours of operation shall be between the hours of 11:30
a.m. and 1:30 p.m. and between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m.
   (D)   Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the vehicle
upon which equipment is mounted, or from which sound is emitted, is operated
and propelled at a speed of at least 15 mph, except when the vehicle is stopped
or impeded by traffic. When stopped by traffic or otherwise impeded, the sound-
amplifying equipment shall not be operated for a period longer than one minute
at each stop and the sound-amplifying equipment shall not again be operated
until the vehicle has progressed 300 feet from each of such stopping places.
   (E)   Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated or sound emitted
therefrom within 300 feet of hospitals, schools, churches or courthouses.
   (F)   The human speech or recorded voice amplified shall not be profane,
lewd, indecent, offensive or slanderous, and the words used shall not be such
as to incite riot, unlawfulness, breaches of the peace or force or violence.
   (G)   The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible
for a distance in excess of 300 feet from the sound vehicle in any direction.
   (H)   No sound-amplifying equipment shall be operated in excess of 15 watts
of power in the last stages of amplification.
   (I)   The vehicle shall, at all times, be operated so as not to interfere
with the normal movement of traffic of vehicles and pedestrians, and shall be
stopped both in movement and operation of sound-amplifying equipment upon the
approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
   (J)   The movement of such vehicles shall, at all times, comply with the
provisions of the California Vehicle Code and this code relating to traffic
regulations.
   (K)   A statement that applicant, if granted a permit, will not permit,
suffer or allow the use and operation of the vehicle in any manner other than
as set forth in the application, or the use of any other equipment apparatus or
device other than as described and referred to in the application.
   (L)   The vehicle with sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated
within 300 feet of any hall, auditorium, coliseum or other place wherein a
meeting or other public event is in progress and more than 100 persons are in
attendance.
(Ord. 2096, passed 2-21-1956)
§ 8.57.080 COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING BY SOUND TRUCK PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, any sound
vehicle for commercial sound advertising purposes in the city with sound-
amplifying equipment in operation.
(Ord. 2096, passed 2-21-1956; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 8.57.090 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 2096, passed 2-21-1956; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 8.60: FIREWORKS
Section
   
8.60.010   Location of sales and discharge of fireworks
   
8.60.015   Sale of fireworks to minors prohibited; identification required
   
8.60.020   License - required
   
8.60.030   License - application - public liability insurance
   
8.60.040   License - notice of granting or rejection
   
8.60.050   License - prerequisites to issuance
   
8.60.060   Suspension of license - appeal procedure
   
8.60.070   Operation of temporary fireworks stand
   
8.60.080   Requirements for fireworks supplier
   
8.60.090   License tax
   
8.60.095   Regulatory fee for licensee and fireworks supplier
   
8.60.100   Temporary sales tax permit required
   
8.60.110   Display of license and sales tax permit
   
8.60.120   Permissible locations for discharge
   
8.60.130   Prohibitions on sale or discharge
   
8.60.140   Reserved
   
8.60.150   Violation - penalty
   
8.60.155   Reward Fund
   
8.60.160   Financial reporting
   
8.60.170   Residential storage of fireworks
   
Appendix A: Location of Sales and Discharge of Fireworks
§ 8.60.010 LOCATION OF SALES AND DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Safe and sane fireworks, as defined by the Cal. Health and Safety
Code, § 12529, may be sold, stored, possessed and discharged within the city
subject to the requirements of this chapter, except that such sale, storage,
possession or discharge shall not be allowed in the following designated areas.
Such areas are depicted on a map entitled “Location of Sales and Discharge of
Fireworks” on file in the City Clerk’s office and incorporated herein by
reference, a reduced copy of which is attached to this chapter as
Appendix A.
   (B)   Such areas are designated as follows:
      (1)   That area within the city lying north of a line extending from the
west city limits at Highland Avenue to the east city limits and bounded on the
south side by streets and highways as follows: commencing from the west city
limits at the centerline of Highland Avenue thence easterly to the intersection
of Highland Avenue and the 210/30 Freeway; thence easterly following the 210/30
Freeway to the interchange of Highway 330; thence north-easterly following
Highway 330 to the intersection of Highland Avenue, east of Boulder; thence
easterly from the intersection of Highland Avenue and Highway 330 along the
centerline of Highland Avenue; thence continuing south-easterly along the
centerline of Highland Avenue and its south-easterly prolongation to the
intersection of the southerly prolongation of the most easterly borderline of
the city, as depicted on the previously referenced map on file in the City
Clerk’s office, a reduced copy of which is attached to this chapter;
      (2)   That area within the city, whether contiguous or not, which lies
north or northwest of a line from the west city limits at Highland Avenue, in a
westerly direction on Highland Avenue to the 210 Freeway, and then west on the
210 Freeway to the I-15 Freeway. That area within the city, whether contiguous
or not, which lies north or northeast of the intersection of the I-15 Freeway
and the 215 Freeway, as depicted on the previously referenced map on file in
the City Clerk’s office, a reduced copy of which is attached to this chapter;
      (3)   Inclusive of the area within the city limits beginning at the
intersection of Highland Avenue and Boulder Avenue, Highland Avenue west to
Victoria Avenue, Victoria Avenue south to Baseline Street; Baseline Street east
to Boulder Avenue, Boulder Avenue north to Highland Avenue, as depicted on the
previously referenced map on file in the City Clerk’s office, a reduced copy of
which is attached to this chapter; and
      (4)   Inclusive of the area beginning at the intersection of Pacific
Street and Del Rosa Avenue, Pacific Street west to Perris Hill Park Road,
Perris Hill Park Road north to an imaginary line extending north from Perris
Hill Park Road to intersect Highland Avenue, Highland Avenue east to Del Rosa
Avenue, Del Rosa Avenue south to Pacific Street, as depicted on the previously
referenced map on file in the City Clerk’s office, a reduced copy of which is
attached to this chapter.
(Ord. 2884, passed 2-6-1968; Ord. MC-219, passed 11-2-1982; Ord. MC-1022,
passed 5-19-1998; Ord. MC-1138, passed 2-19-2003; Ord. MC-1578, passed 5-18-
2022)
§ 8.60.015 SALE OF FIREWORKS TO MINORS PROHIBITED; IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   The sale of fireworks to anyone under the age of 18 is prohibited. A valid
form of identification is required at time of purchase.
(Ord. MC-1022, passed 5-19-1998; Ord. MC-1138, passed 2-19-2003)
§ 8.60.020 LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person,
organization, group or association and the like to offer for sale or sell at
retail any fireworks of any kind in the city without having first applied for
and received a license from the Department of Finance and Management Services.
(Ord. 2884, passed 2-6-1968; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1138,
passed 2-19-2003; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-
2024)
§ 8.60.030 LICENSE - APPLICATION - PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   All applications for a license to sell fireworks shall:
   (A)   Be made in writing and accompanied by the tax set forth in §
8.60.090, in addition to a non-refundable fireworks administrative fee of $50,
or such other amount as shall be subsequently set by resolution of the Mayor
and City Council. The fee will be used to defray the administrative costs of
the fireworks program. Applications shall be made between March 1 and March 31
of each year, except when the thirty-first falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday, the following business day shall be determined to be the last day;
   (B)   Set forth the proposed location of the fireworks stand applied for.
The stands must be on private property located in Commercial General (“CG”) or
Commercial Regional (“CR”) General Plan Land Use Districts and the written
permission of the owner of record or lessee must accompany the application;
   (C)   Be accompanied by an assurance that if the license is issued to the
applicant, the applicant shall, at the time of receipt of the license, deliver
to the Department of Finance and Management Services a minimum of $1,000,000
public liability and property damage insurance policies with riders attached to
the policies designating the city as an additional insured under this chapter,
and a copy of the requisite permit from the State Fire Marshal;
   (D)   Include a copy of the applicant’s current 501(c)(3), (4), (5), (6),
(8), (10), (19), (20) or 501(d) verification of non-profit status, or
demonstrate that it is a non-profit organization, group, association and the
like, which is organized primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, civic or
social betterment (including public or private school clubs, groups,
organizations or such other public or private school affiliates) or charitable
purposes;
   (E)   Demonstrate how revenues received would benefit the citizens of the
city by submitting official Board minutes detailing the intent and
authorization to sell fireworks. Such minutes shall detail what sites,
populations or projects within the city will benefit and for what purposes; and
   (F)   Have attached a completed financial statement form that describes
anticipated revenues, expenses and profits. Such form will be provided by the
Department of Finance and Management Services to each applicant. The
information contained in this form shall furthermore detail how much money will
be provided to the projects mentioned pursuant to division (E) above. No less
than 90% of the net profits derived from the sale of fireworks in the city by
the applicant shall be utilized for the direct advancement of the applicant’s
stated non-profit purposes within the city in accordance with division (E)
above.
(Ord. 2884, passed 2-6-1968; Ord. MC-1138, passed 2-19-2003; Ord. MC-1484,
passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1578, passed 5-18-2022; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-
2024)
§ 8.60.040 LICENSE - NOTICE OF GRANTING OR REJECTION.
   Applicants for any such license shall be notified by the Department of
Finance and Management Services by April 15 of the granting or rejection of
such application for a license. No license shall be issued if the applicant
fails to provide all the information or fails to meet all the criteria
specified in §
8.60.030, or any other provision of this chapter. The decision of the
Department of Finance and Management Services may be appealed to the Mayor and
City Council under the provisions of
Chapter 2.64. The decision of the Mayor and City Council shall be final.
(Ord. 2884, passed 2-6-1968; Ord. MC-1138, passed 2-19-2003; Ord. MC-1484,
passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 8.60.050 LICENSE - PREREQUISITES TO ISSUANCE.
   The following qualifications must be met by each applicant for a license
issued under this chapter.
   (A)   No license shall be issued to any applicant, except a non-profit
organization, group, association and the like, organized and operating within
the city limits in conformity with §
8.60.030(D), (E) and (F).
   (B)   Each such applicant must have its principal and permanent meeting
place in the corporate limits of the city and must have been organized and
established in the city’s corporate limits for a minimum of one year
continuously preceding the filing of the application for the license, and must
have a bona fide membership of at least 20 members.
   (C)   No applicant may receive more than one license or participate in more
than one fireworks stand during any one calendar year. The maximum number of
licenses that may be issued during any one calendar year shall be 35. All
applicants shall be reviewed for compliance with this chapter. All qualified
applicants who held a license during 2002, whether as an individual or as part
of a joint venture, shall have priority for the available licenses in 2003.
Priority will also be given in 2003 to any joint venture which has at least one
qualified applicant who held a license during 2002. Any remaining licenses in
2003, after deducting priority applicants, shall be determined by lottery and
shall be granted by a drawing supervised by the City Clerk.
   (D)   One license may be issued to two or more qualified applicants as a
joint venture; provided that the application for the joint venture is submitted
prior to the application deadline. Each qualified applicant in a joint venture
which is granted a license is deemed to be a co-licensee and shall have the
same benefits, duties and liabilities under the license.
   (E)   All qualified applicants who held a license the immediate previous
year, whether as an individual or as part of a joint venture, shall have
priority for the available licenses for the immediate next year. However, if
the total number of qualified applicants who were licensees or co-licensees
from said previous year exceeds 35 licenses because the membership(s) of joint
venture(s) has changed or the joint venture ceases to exist, then those
qualified applicants which were part of such joint venture(s) shall lose their
priority and shall be placed in a lottery drawing for any remaining available
licenses after all other qualified applicants from the immediate previous year
are granted licenses. If the total number of qualified applicants who were
licensees or co-licensees from the immediate previous year does not exceed 35
licenses, then any remaining licenses shall be determined by lottery and shall
be granted by a drawing supervised by the Director of Finance and Management
Services. Any prior licensee, the license of which has been suspended under the
provisions of §
8.60.060, shall be eligible for a new license only upon satisfying the Fire
Chief or the Police Chief that suitable arrangements have been made to preclude
future violations.
(Ord. 2884, passed 2-6-1968; Ord. 3236, passed 2-25-1972; Ord. MC-219, passed
11-2-1982; Ord. MC-1138, passed 2-19-2003; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord.
MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 8.60.060 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE - APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, and the Police Chief, or his
or her designee, shall each be authorized to suspend immediately and without
notice or formal hearing the license of any licensee which violates any rule,
regulation or ordinance while operating or preparing to operate a fireworks
stand during or immediately preceding any period of sale. If the Fire Chief, or
his or her designee, or the Police Chief, or his or her designee, establishes
that a violation has occurred too late to suspend the license during the period
of sale, he or she shall have power to suspend the licensee from future
licenses, and to suspend the priority of the licensee, for any such violation
found to have occurred during or immediately preceding or immediately following
the authorized period of sale.
   (B)   The decision of the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, or the Police
Chief, or his or her designee, to suspend the license of any licensee shall be
subject to review by the City Manager. In view of the limited sales period each
year, for suspensions affecting the sale period, such hearing shall be held at
the earliest possible time that the licensee, the City Manager, or his or her
designee, and the representative of the Fire Chief or Police Chief can schedule
such hearing; provided that in every case, said hearing shall be held within 72
hours of the Fire Chief’s or Police Chief’s decision. For suspensions after the
sale period, the hearing shall be held within one month after the request for
hearing, which request must be made within 15 days after notice of the
suspension. The City Manager is authorized to set aside the suspension, or to
modify the suspension by limiting its effect to only one or more days, or by
setting aside the forfeiture of priority status for future years. The decision
of the City Manager may be appealed to the Mayor and City Council under the
provisions of Chapter 2.64. The decision of the Mayor and City Council shall be
final.
(Ord. MC-219, passed 11-2-1982; Ord. MC-1138, passed 2-19-2003; Ord. MC-1484,
passed 4-18-2018)
§ 8.60.070 OPERATION OF TEMPORARY FIREWORKS STAND.
   The license entity, the person(s) who signs the application for the license
and the supervisor or manager on the license present in charge of each
fireworks stand shall comply and ensure compliance with the following.
   (A)   No person, organization, group, association and the like other than
the licensee entity shall be allowed to operate the stand for which the license
is issued or to otherwise participate in the profits of the operation of such
stand.
   (B)   No person, organization, group, association and the like other than
the individuals who are members of the licensee entity, or the spouses or adult
children of such members, shall be allowed to sell or otherwise participate in
the sale of fireworks at such stand.
   (C)   No consideration shall be paid to any person for selling or otherwise
participating in the sale of fireworks at such stand.
   (D)   No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted in the stand and
signage shall be prominently displayed in/on the stands stating that no person
under 18 years of age shall be permitted in the stand.
   (E)   No person shall consume alcoholic beverages within 25 feet of any
stand.
   (F)   An emergency contact telephone number shall be posted on the exterior
and interior surfaces of all exit doors.
   (G)   All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only
from within a temporary fireworks stand, and sales from any other building or
structure is prohibited.
   (H)   No fireworks stand shall be located within 25 feet of any other
building nor within 100 feet of any gasoline pump.
   (I)   Fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions of the Building
Code of the city; provided that all stands shall be erected under the
supervision of the Director of the Department of Development Services, or his
or her designee, who shall require that stands be constructed in a manner that
will reasonably ensure the safety of attendants and patrons. In addition, each
stand and its location shall be inspected and approved by the Fire Marshal
prior to commencing storage or sales of fireworks therein.
   (J)   No stand shall have a floor area in excess of 300 square feet.
   (K)   Each stand in excess of 24 feet in length must have at least two
exits; and each stand in excess of 40 feet in length must have at least three
exits spaced approximately equidistant apart; provided, however, that in no
case shall the distance between exits exceed 24 feet.
   (L)   Each stand shall be provided with two two and one-half gallon water
pressure type fire extinguishers, underwriter approved, in good working order
and easily accessible for use in case of fire, at all times during the storage/
sales of fireworks.
   (M)   All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared from the location
of the stand, including a distance of at least 20 feet surrounding the stand.
   (N)   “No smoking” signs shall be prominently displayed on the fireworks
stand, and no smoking shall be permitted within 25 feet of any fireworks stand.
   (O)   Each stand shall have a person present and designated as supervisor or
manager in charge thereof, at all times, who is listed on the license, while
fireworks are stored or sold therein. Sleeping or remaining in the stand after
close of business each day is forbidden.
   (P)   The sale, use, storage or possession of fireworks shall not begin
before 12:00 p.m. on July 1 and shall not continue after midnight on July 4.
   (Q)   Each stand shall post for public viewing, a copy of the map identified
in §
8.60.010 (“Location of Sales and Discharge of Fireworks” in
Appendix A) and shall also provide a copy of this map to each purchaser of
fireworks. The costs of copying such maps shall be borne by the licensee.
   (R)   All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the
location by 5:00 p.m. on July 5.
   (S)   The fireworks stand shall be removed from the temporary location by
12:00 p.m. on July 15, and all accompanying litter shall be cleared from the
location by said time and date.
(Ord. 2884, passed 2-6-1968; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1138,
passed 2-19-2003; Ord. MC-1194, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. MC-1578, passed 5-18-
2022)
§ 8.60.080 REQUIREMENTS FOR FIREWORKS SUPPLIER.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a license, each applicant shall file with the
Department of Finance and Management Services a cash deposit, certificate of
deposit or a surety bond posted by the fireworks supplier and made payable to
the city in the amount of $300, or such other amount as may be subsequently set
by resolution of the Mayor and City Council to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Such deposit or certificate shall be refundable upon compliance with
the provisions and requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
the removal of the stand and the cleaning of the site.
   (C)   In the event the fireworks supplier does not so comply to remove the
stand or clean the site in the manner required by the Department of Community
Development and Housing, the city may do so, or cause the same to be done by
other persons, and the reasonable cost thereof shall be a charge against the
fireworks supplier and his or her surety and the deposit, certificate or bond.
(Ord. 2884, passed 2-6-1968; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1138,
passed 2-19-2003; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-
2024)
§ 8.60.090 LICENSE TAX.
   As set by Ord. 2884, the license tax for the selling of fireworks within the
city shall be $200 per year per stand which tax must be paid at the time
application for a stand is filed with the Department of Finance and Management
Services.
(Ord. 2884, passed 2-6-1968; Ord. MC-1138, passed 2-19-2003; Ord. MC-1484,
passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 8.60.095 REGULATORY FEE FOR LICENSEE AND FIREWORKS SUPPLIER.
   (A)   The city shall assess a regulatory fee based on the gross sales of
fireworks on all fireworks sales that occur within the city. One-half of the
regulatory fee shall be paid by the licensee and the remaining one-half shall
be paid by the fireworks supplier. The purpose of the regulatory fee is to
raise sufficient funds for the city to pay for fireworks public education and
an awareness campaign about fireworks, and for enforcing the provisions of this
chapter, including extra personnel time for fire inspection and enforcement
duties.
   (B)   Prior to imposing the fee, the city shall prepare a study of the
anticipated cost for fireworks education, awareness and enforcement. After
preparing the study, the Mayor and City Council shall adopt a resolution
setting the regulatory fee rate no later than 7:00 p.m. on July 1 of each year.
The regulatory fee rate shall not exceed 10% of the total gross sales of the
fireworks sold in the city by licensees during the period set forth in §
8.60.070(P).
   (C)   The Department of Finance and Management Services, each year, shall
determine the amount of the regulatory fee based on the licensee’s fireworks
sales financial statements. Each licensee shall provide its fireworks sales
financial statement and its fireworks supplier’s information to the city no
later than August 31 for the period set forth in §
8.60.070(P). After the Department of Finance and Management Services receives
the financial statements, the Department of Finance and Management Services
shall invoice each licensee and each fireworks supplier for its share of the
total annual regulatory fee. Payment of the regulatory fee by each licensee and
each fireworks supplier shall be due to the city 30 days following the issuance
of the invoice.
   (D)   Failure by any licensee or fireworks supplier to pay the amount
invoiced by the City Department of Finance and Management Services shall be
cause to disqualify the licensee from obtaining a license to sell fireworks and
disqualify the fireworks supplier from providing its products for sale in the
city in the future. In the event that the regulatory fee is not paid by the due
date, it shall be subject to a 10% penalty for each month or portion of a month
that it is overdue. If not paid by the due date, the amount becomes a debt owed
to the city subject to collection by any legal means available.
   (E)   Any person who violates or causes violation of any provision of this
section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor, which, upon
conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-1194, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. MC-1308, passed 6-16-2009; Ord. MC-1390,
passed 7-1-2013; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 8.60.100 TEMPORARY SALES TAX PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Applicants licensed for the selling of fireworks are required to obtain a
temporary sales tax permit from the State Board of Equalization.
(Ord. 2884, passed 2-6-1968; Ord. MC-1138, passed 2-19-2003)
§ 8.60.110 DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND SALES TAX PERMIT.
   The license to sell fireworks and temporary sales tax permit shall be
displayed in a prominent place in the fireworks stand.
(Ord. 2884, passed 2-6-1968; Ord. MC-1138, passed 2-19-2003)
§ 8.60.120 PERMISSIBLE LOCATIONS FOR DISCHARGE.
   The use of fireworks in the city shall be limited to private property except
as otherwise provided in this chapter. No fireworks shall be discharged on
public or private unpaved open areas such as vacant lots or fields, or in a
public street or right-of-way, or in public parks except when specifically
permitted for public display, and except those areas approved by the Fire
Chief.
(Ord. MC-785, passed 5-21-1991; Ord. MC-788, passed 6-4-1991; Ord. MC-965,
passed 4-3-1996; Ord. MC-966, passed 4-16-1996; Ord. MC-1138, passed 2-19-2003)
§ 8.60.130 PROHIBITIONS ON SALE OR DISCHARGE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, organization, group, association and
the like to sell, use, store or possess any fireworks except during the time
period specified in §
8.60.070(P).
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, organization, group, association and
the like to sell, use, store or possess any fireworks at any time in any of the
areas described in §
8.60.010.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, organization, group, association and
the like to store, possess, ignite, explode, project or otherwise fire or use
any fireworks, or permit the ignition, explosion or projection thereof, except
during the period specified in §
8.60.070(P).
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person, organization, group, association and
the like to store, possess, ignite, explode, project or otherwise fire or use
any fireworks, or permit the ignition, explosion or projection thereof, in any
of the areas described in §
8.60.010, or upon or over or onto the property of another without his or her
consent, or to ignite, explode, project or otherwise fire or make use of any
fireworks within ten feet of any resident dwelling or other structure used as a
place of habitation by human beings.
(Ord. 2884, passed 2-6-1968; Ord. MC-1138, passed 2-19-2003; Ord. MC-1194,
passed 4-4-2005; Ord. MC-1578, passed 5-18-2022)
§ 8.60.140 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1269, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 8.60.150 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, organization, group, association and the like violating
any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor,
which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions
of §
1.12.010.
   (B)   In addition to any other penalties provided by law, any person,
organization, group, association and the like violating any provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to an administrative civil penalty of:
      (1)   One thousand dollars for the first offense;
      (2)   Two thousand five hundred dollars for the second offense within 36
months; and
      (3)   Five thousand dollars for each subsequent offense within 36 months.
(Ord. 2884, passed 2-6-1968; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1022,
passed 5-19-1998; Ord. MC-1073, passed 5-3-2000; Ord. MC-1138, passed 2-19-
2003; Ord. MC-1269, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. MC-1535, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 8.60.155 REWARD FUND.
   The City Manager may establish a special fund consisting of fines collected
from firework violations to pay rewards in the amount of no more than $250 to
individuals providing information leading to the identification and successful
criminal or civil prosecution of any person violating this municipal code
related to the unlawful possession, sale or discharge of fireworks.
(Ord. MC-1535, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 8.60.160 FINANCIAL REPORTING.
   No later than August 31 of each year (or the next working day if August 31
falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday), each licensee operating a stand
or participating in a joint venture shall submit to the Department of Finance
and Management Services a financial summary of the total sales from fireworks
on the financial summary form provided by the Department of Finance and
Management Services. The financial summary shall have a summary of actual
expenses, revenues and profit for that year and shall have receipts attached
for all expenses for each stand, as well as any incentive payments, gifts or
other financial consideration provided to members of the licensee or its
volunteers. Licensees failing to comply with the aforementioned financial
summary deadline of August 31 shall be ineligible to receive a license for the
sale of fireworks the following year either as an individual licensee or as a
member of a joint venture.
(Ord. MC-1138, passed 2-19-2003; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 8.60.170 RESIDENTIAL STORAGE OF FIREWORKS.
   It is unlawful for any person or persons to store any fireworks inside a
residence, garage or structure on residential property in the city.
(Ord. MC-1578, passed 5-18-2022)
APPENDIX A: LOCATION OF SALES AND DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7bb690b80ee5b92444942f82544ba748383751e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5951.png]
CHAPTER 8.61: PROHIBITED FIREWORKS
Section
   
8.61.010   Dangerous fireworks prohibited
   
8.61.020   Dangerous fireworks defined
   
8.61.030   Violation - penalty
   
8.61.040   State law limitations
§ 8.61.010 DANGEROUS FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   In accordance with state law, it is unlawful for any person, organization,
group, association and the like to possess, sell, use or discharge any
“dangerous fireworks” in the city, without a permit or license granted by the
State Fire Marshal.
§ 8.61.020 DANGEROUS FIREWORKS DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS FIREWORKS. Means and carries the same definition as provided in
Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 12505, as amended by the state legislature from
time to time.
§ 8.61.030 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, organization, group, association and the like violating
any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon
conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
   (B)   In addition to any other penalties provided by law, any person,
organization, group or association and the like violating any provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to an administrative civil penalty of:
      (1)   Two thousand five hundred dollars for the first offense;
      (2)   Five thousand dollars for the second offense within 36 months; and
      (3)   Ten thousand dollars for each subsequent offense within 36 months.
(Ord. MC-1535, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 8.61.040 STATE LAW LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Any administrative fine or administrative civil penalty assessed
pursuant to this chapter shall provide for cost reimbursement to the office of
the State Fire Marshal and the collection of disposal costs pursuant to Cal.
Health and Safety Code, § 12557.
   (B)   This chapter shall be limited to apply only to a person, organization,
group, association and the like who possesses or the seizure of 25 pounds or
less of dangerous fireworks.
   (C)   Any administrative fine or administrative civil penalty collected
pursuant to this chapter shall not be subject to Cal. Health and Safety Code, §
12706, “Disposition of Fines and Forfeitures.”
(Ord. MC-1269, passed 4-22-2008)
CHAPTER 8.63: EXPLOSIVES AND FIRES
Section
   
8.63.010   Permit - required when
   
8.63.020   Compliance with permit required
   
8.63.030   Fires to be kept under control
   
8.63.040   Permit required in hazardous fire area
   
8.63.050   Fires on brush or grasslands or forest covered lands
   
8.63.060   Blasting - permit required
   
8.63.070   Smoking within hazardous fire area
   
8.63.080   Removal and disposition of ashes in hazardous fire area
   
8.63.090   Use of chimney or heat producing appliance in hazardous fire area
   
8.63.100   Maintenance of fire protection of firebreak required when
   
8.63.110   Reserved
   
8.63.120   Placement of inflammable material in hazardous fire area
   
8.63.130   Hazardous fire area described
   
8.63.140   Violation - penalty
§ 8.63.010 PERMIT - REQUIRED WHEN.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, at any time, to light a
fire or fires or use fire for the clearing of land or to burn brush, slash,
fallen timber, grass or other inflammable material within the city without
first having obtained a written permit from the City Fire Department; that
nothing in this section shall prevent the use of proper and lawful fires for
safe domestic purposes; further, provided, that no permit will be necessary to
burn inflammable material in properly constructed incinerators, outdoor water
heating units, cooking grills and other similar devices having chimneys covered
with spark arresters consisting of galvanized or copper screening of a mesh not
larger than one-fourth of an inch, and openings such as doors, to be spark
tight and otherwise approved by the Fire Department, and where the land around
such incinerator, outdoor water heating units, cooking grills and other similar
devices is cleared of all inflammable material within a radius of at least ten
feet.
(Ord. 1988, passed 7-21-1953)
§ 8.63.020 COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation after having obtained a
written permit, as provided in §
8.63.010, to burn at any time or in any place or in any manner other than that
set forth in such permit.
(Ord. 1988, passed 7-21-1953; Ord. 2192, passed 10-22-1957)
§ 8.63.030 FIRES TO BE KEPT UNDER CONTROL.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the city to allow or
permit any fire attended by him, her or it to escape from his, her or its
control.
(Ord. 1988, passed 7-21-1953)
§ 8.63.040 PERMIT REQUIRED IN HAZARDOUS FIRE AREA.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the city, within
the hazardous fire area, as defined in §
8.63.130, to make, kindle, ignite, light or build or use any camp fire, bonfire
or any other out-of-door fire without first obtaining a written permit from the
City Fire Department.
(Ord. 1988, passed 7-21-1953)
§ 8.63.050 FIRES ON BRUSH OR GRASSLANDS OR FOREST COVERED LANDS.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the city to set or
ignite camp fires or other fires on any brush or grasslands or forest covered
lands, or upon any public roads or highways, except at such places as are or
may be designated by the City Fire Department, and a permit issued therefor in
writing.
(Ord. 1988, passed 7-21-1953)
§ 8.63.060 BLASTING - PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, within the city, at any
time, to blast with dynamite, powder or other explosive without first having
obtained a written permit from the Fire Department.
(Ord. 1988, passed 7-21-1953)
§ 8.63.070 SMOKING WITHIN HAZARDOUS FIRE AREA.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, within the boundaries of
the hazardous fire area described in §
8.63.130, between May 1 and December 31 of each and every year, to smoke a
cigar, cigarette, tobacco or any other substance in any form, except at
designated and improved campgrounds, or occupied places of habitation;
provided, however, that such designated and improved campgrounds, and places of
habitation, within the meaning of this chapter, will only include those
portions of designated and improved campgrounds and places of habitation which
are cleared of all inflammable materials and vegetation, as provided in §
8.63.100; and it is unlawful for any person in the city to throw, place or
cause to be placed upon any grass, brush or forest covered lands, or upon any
road or trail traversing such grass, brush or forest covered lands, any lighted
or burning match, cigar, cigarette or any burning substance without first
extinguishing the same.
(Ord. 1988, passed 7-21-1953)
§ 8.63.080 REMOVAL AND DISPOSITION OF ASHES IN HAZARDOUS FIRE AREA.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, within the hazardous
fire area, to remove ashes from stoves, fireplaces, heaters, grills or any
other like device in which burning has been done, and to dispose of such ashes
or waste from such device out of doors, until such ashes or waste have been
placed in a metal or other fireproof receptacle and soaked in water for at
least 24 hours.
(Ord. 1988, passed 7-21-1953)
§ 8.63.090 USE OF CHIMNEY OR HEAT PRODUCING APPLIANCE IN HAZARDOUS FIRE AREA.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the city, within
the hazardous fire area, as defined in §
8.63.130, to use any chimney in conjunction with any fireplace, incinerator or
any heat producing appliance in which solid fuel is used upon any cabin, house,
hotel, building, structure or premises unless maintained with a spark arrester
constructed with heavy wire, mesh or other non-combustible material of at least
19 gauge, with openings not to exceed one-half inch, mounted in or over all
outside flue openings in a vertical or near vertical position visible from the
ground.
(Ord. 1988, passed 7-21-1953; Ord. 3155, passed 3-9-1971)
§ 8.63.100 MAINTENANCE OF FIRE PROTECTION OF FIREBREAK REQUIRED WHEN.
   Any person, firm or corporation owning, leasing, using, controlling or
operating any cabin, house, hotel, house trailer, apiary or other building,
structure or improvement in the hazardous fire area shall, at all times,
maintain upon his or her said land or adjacent to the cabin, house, improvement
or structure, an effective fire protection or firebreak; such fire protection
or firebreak is to be made by removing all inflammable vegetation or growth or
other inflammable materials or vegetation from the ground around the buildings,
structures and improvements for a distance of not less than 30 feet from the
exterior walls of the buildings, structures, house trailers and improvements,
the aforementioned fire protections or firebreak shall cover all lands situated
between the building structures and the property boundary; provided, however,
that this section shall not apply to trees, except where dead or where the
foliage of the trees are within ten feet of the chimney, nor shall it apply to
evergreen vegetation where growing and presented for decorative effect.
(Ord. 1988, passed 7-21-1953)
§ 8.63.110 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-28, passed 2-3-1981)
§ 8.63.120 PLACEMENT OF INFLAMMABLE MATERIAL IN HAZARDOUS FIRE AREA.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the hazardous
fire area, as defined in §
8.63.130, to place, or cause to be placed on, his or her own land, or on the
land of another, any rubbish, paper, sawdust, shavings, boxes, petroleum
products not in closed containers, or residue, fallen timber, slash, limb wood,
branches of trees, brush, grass, litter or other inflammable material, except
at places and in the manner designated by the City Fire Department, and all
such inflammable material shall be effectively destroyed by fire at such time
and in such a manner as shall be designated by the Fire Department after
securing a permit from said Department.
   (B)   Any such rubbish, paper, sawdust, shavings, boxes, petroleum products
or residue, fallen limbs, slash, limb wood, branches of trees, brush, grass,
litter or other inflammable material placed, caused to be placed or existing on
any land, contrary to the provisions of this chapter, is a public nuisance and
shall be abated pursuant to law.
(Ord. 1988, passed 7-21-1953)
§ 8.63.130 HAZARDOUS FIRE AREA DESCRIBED.
   (A)   Hazardous fire area is land which is covered with grass, grain brush
or forest, whether privately or publicly owned, which is so situated or is of
such inaccessible location that fire originating upon such land would present
an abnormally difficult job of suppression or would result in great and unusual
damage through fire or resulting erosion.
   (B)   Such areas are designated as follows:
      (1)   All that area within the city lying north of a line extending
easterly from the west city limits to the east city limits and bounded on the
south side by streets and highways as follows: Barstow Freeway from west city
limits to the intersection of Palm Avenue and the Barstow Freeway; northerly
from the Barstow Freeway on Palm Avenue to Kendall Drive; easterly on Kendall
Drive to 40th Street and transition easterly from the intersection of Kendall
Drive and 40th Street; on 40th Street; and continue easterly to Mountain
Avenue; from the intersection of 40th Street and Mountain Avenue; southerly on
Mountain Avenue to 39th Street; easterly on 39th Street to Del Rosa Avenue;
southerly from the intersection of 39th Street to Marshall Boulevard; easterly
from the intersection of Del Rosa Avenue and Marshal Boulevard on Marshall
Boulevard; Marshall Boulevard to Victoria Avenue; Victoria Avenue to Piedmont
Drive; Piedmont Drive east to Diablo Drive; Diablo Drive east to El Toro Street
extending east to Highway 330; Highway 330 South to Highland Avenue; thence
East and southeasterly along the centerline of Highland Avenue to the
centerline of Church Street;
      (2)   Inclusive of area beginning at the intersection of Pacific Street
and Del Rosa Avenue; Pacific Street west to Perris Hill Park Road; Perris Hill
Park Road north in a line to intersect Highland Avenue; Highland Avenue east to
Del Rosa Avenue; Del Rosa Avenue south to Pacific Street;
      (3)   Inclusive of area beginning at the intersection of Little Mountain
Drive and Kendall Drive; Kendall Drive east to 40th Street; 40th Street east to
Electric Avenue; Electric Avenue south to Thompson Place; Thompson Place west
to Mayfield Avenue; Mayfield Avenue south to 36th Street; 36th Street west to
“F” Street; “F” Street south to 33rd Street; 33rd Street west to “H” Street;
“H” Street south to Marshall Boulevard; Marshall Boulevard west in a line to
intersect Cajon Boulevard; Cajon Boulevard west to University Parkway/State
Street; University Parkway north to State Street; State Street north to Morgan
Road; Morgan Road East to Little Mountain Drive; Little Mountain Drive north to
Kendall Drive; and
      (4)   Hazardous fire areas shall be inclusive of any additional land
area, whether publicly or privately owned, which the Fire Chief of the Fire
Department determines to be so situated or so inaccessible that fire upon said
land could present an abnormally difficult task of fire suppression. Such
additional land areas shall be designated on a map available to the public and
maintained by the Fire Department at the Central Fire Station, 200 East Third
Street, San Bernardino. The Fire Chief shall provide a written description of
the boundaries of any additional land area to the City Clerk who shall provide
for publication of notice thereof pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov’t
Code, § 6061.
(Ord. 1988, passed 7-21-1953; Ord. 3155, passed 3-9-1971; Ord. 3611, passed 12-
20-1976; Ord. 3869, passed 9-18-1979; Ord. MC-488, passed 12-18-1985)
§ 8.63.140 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is
guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 1988, passed 7-21-1953; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1073,
passed 5-3-2000)
CHAPTER 8.65: DESTRUCTION OF WEAPONS
Section
   
8.65.010   Destruction of weapons in custody of Police Department
   
8.65.020   Lost or stolen weapons
   
8.65.030   Alternatives to destruction
   
8.65.040   Notice to Department of Justice
   
8.65.050   Temporary custody of certain firearms
   
8.65.060   Retention as evidence
   
8.65.070   Definition of firearm
§ 8.65.010 DESTRUCTION OF WEAPONS IN CUSTODY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   Any weapon which is determined to be a nuisance pursuant to Cal. Penal Code,
§§ 19190, 21310, 21390, 21590 and 29300 and is in the possession of the City
Police Department shall, annually, in the month of July, or sooner, if
necessary to conserve local resources including space and utilization of
personnel who maintain files and security of those weapons, be destroyed so
that it can no longer be used as such a weapon except upon the certificate of a
judge of a court of record, or of the County District Attorney or of the City
Attorney, that the retention of it is necessary or proper to the ends of
justice.
(Ord. MC-892, passed 1-12-1994)
§ 8.65.020 LOST OR STOLEN WEAPONS.
   If any weapon has been lost or stolen and is thereafter recovered, or is
used in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance pursuant to Cal. Penal Code,
§§ 19190, 21310, 21390, 21590 and 29300 and §
8.65.010 of this municipal code, without the prior knowledge of its lawful
owner that it would be so used, it shall not be destroyed but shall be restored
to the lawful owner, if his or her identity and address can be reasonably
ascertained, as soon as its use as evidence has been served, upon his or her
identification of the weapon and proof of ownership. Sufficient identification
of ownership shall include, but shall not be limited to, a police report made
at or near the time of loss or theft, or at or near the time of discovery of
the loss or theft. A police report by itself listing the lost or stolen weapon
is sufficient identification of ownership.
(Ord. MC-892, passed 1-12-1994)
§ 8.65.030 ALTERNATIVES TO DESTRUCTION.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority of Cal. Penal Code, §§ 19190, 21310, 21390,
21590 and 29300, when the Police Department has custody of any firearms which
may be useful to the California National Guard, the Coast Guard Auxiliary or to
any military or naval agency of the federal or state government, including, but
not limited to, the California National Guard military museum and resource
center, it may, upon the authority of the Mayor and City Council and the
approval of the Adjutant General, deliver the firearms to the commanding
officer of a unit of the California National Guard, the Coast Guard Auxiliary
or any other military agency of the state or federal government in lieu of
destruction as required by this chapter. The Police Department shall take a
receipt for the firearms containing a complete description thereof and shall
keep the receipt on file as a public record.
   (B)   When the Police Department has custody of any firearms, or any parts
of any firearms, which are subject to destruction as required by this chapter
it may, in lieu of destroying the weapons, retain and use any of them as may be
useful in carrying out the official duties of the Department, or upon approval
of a court, may release them to any other law enforcement agency for use in
carrying out the official duties of that agency, or may turn over to the
criminalistics laboratory of the Department of Justice or the criminalistics
laboratory of any other Police Department, Sheriff’s office or District
Attorney’s office any weapons which may be useful in carrying out the official
duties of their respective agencies.
   (C)   Any firearm, or part of any firearm, which, rather than being
destroyed, is used for official purposes pursuant to this section shall be
destroyed by the Department or other agency using the weapon when it is no
longer needed for use in carrying out official duties, and shall only be turned
over to another agency pursuant to this chapter if the Agency agrees in writing
to not sell said firearm.
   (D)   The Police Department may, in lieu of destroying any firearms as
required by this chapter, obtain an order from the Superior Court directing the
release of the firearms to the Sheriff. The Sheriff shall record a description
of such firearms and release them to a basic training academy as provided in
Cal. Penal Code, §§ 19190, 21310, 21390, 21590 and 29300.
(Ord. MC-892, passed 1-12-1994; Ord. MC-894, passed 1-26-1994)
§ 8.65.040 NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.
   Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code, § 29300, when the Police Department retains or
destroys a firearm pursuant to this chapter, it shall notify the Department of
Justice of the retention or destruction. The notification of each firearm,
including the name of the manufacturer or brand name, model, caliber and serial
number.
(Ord. MC-892, passed 1-12-1994)
§ 8.65.050 TEMPORARY CUSTODY OF CERTAIN FIREARMS.
   This chapter shall not apply to those firearms taken into temporary custody
at the scene of domestic violence. Such weapons shall be disposed of as
provided in Cal. Penal Code, § 18000, except that when such firearms are not
claimed by or returned to the owners, they shall not be sold but shall be
destroyed as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. MC-892, passed 1-12-1994)
§ 8.65.060 RETENTION AS EVIDENCE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to those weapons which are or
may be evidence in either a criminal or civil case, which weapons shall be
retained pending a final decision in such case.
(Ord. MC-892, passed 1-12-1994)
§ 8.65.070 DEFINITION OF FIREARM.
   For the purposes of this chapter, weapon and firearm shall be synonymous and
firearm shall have the definition provided in Cal. Penal Code, § 16520.
(Ord. MC-892, passed 1-12-1994)
CHAPTER 8.66: MOVING OF BUILDINGS AND
OVERSIZE LOADS
Section
   
8.66.010   Definitions
   
8.66.020   Permit - required
   
8.66.030   Permit - application
   
8.66.040   Permit - issuance
   
8.66.050   Fees
   
8.66.060   Warning flags, lights or reflectors required - flagger required
   
8.66.070   Surety bond required
   
8.66.080   Violation - penalty
§ 8.66.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any type of structure normally used as a place of habitation,
business, storage or for the shelter of animals.
   OVERSIZE LOADS. Any load other than a building carried on a vehicle which
exceeds a height of 13 feet, six inches from the surface of the pavement to the
top of the load, or exceeds a width of 96 inches, or the length authorized by
the California Vehicle Code, and the exceptions therein authorized.
(Ord. 2005, passed 11-24-1953)
§ 8.66.020 PERMIT - REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move, or cause to be
moved, any building or oversize load on, over or across any public street,
place or alley within the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from
the City Director of Public Services, or for any person, firm or corporation to
fail, neglect or refuse to obey or comply with any term or condition of such
permit.
(Ord. 2005, passed 11-24-1953; Ord. 2498, passed 5-14-1963; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984)
§ 8.66.030 PERMIT - APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for such permit shall be in writing and shall be filed
with the Director of Public Services a minimum of 48 hours prior to the entry
of any building, structure or oversize load on any public street, alley or
place in the city.
   (B)   The application for permit shall show the following information:
      (1)   The present location and the proposed location to which the
building or oversize load is to be moved;
      (2)   The height, width and length of the building or oversize load to be
moved;
      (3)   The date and hour of the proposed entry on to, and the date and
hour of clearance of the building or oversize load from any public street or
place;
      (4)   Approval, in writing, of the Park Superintendent regarding street
tree clearance on route of moving; and
      (5)   If the application is one for moving a building to a site inside
the city, the application shall be accompanied by a certificate in writing of
the Secretary of the Planning Commission or the City Clerk to the effect that
the Planning Commission or the City Council has approved the moving of the
building to the new location. If the application is one for moving a building
to a site outside the city, the application shall be accompanied by a
certificate of the Chief Building Inspector to the effect that the applicant
has conformed to the requirements of Ord. 2014 (incorporated in Chapter 15.36).
(Ord. 2005, passed 11-24-1953; Ord. 2510, passed 7-16-1963; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985)
§ 8.66.040 PERMIT - ISSUANCE.
   Upon filing of the application, accompanied by the fee and bond required by
this chapter, the Director of Public Services may issue his or her permit
designating the streets over, on or across which such building or oversize load
shall be moved.
(Ord. 2005, passed 11-24-1953; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 8.66.050 FEES.
   The fees, which will apply to permits for moving any building or oversize
load on, over or across any public street, alley or place within the city, will
be established, from time to time, by the Mayor and Council by resolution.
(Ord. 2005, passed 11-24-1953; Ord. MC-729, passed 5-21-1990)
§ 8.66.060 WARNING FLAGS, LIGHTS OR REFLECTORS REQUIRED - FLAGGER REQUIRED.
   It shall be the duty of every person moving any building or oversize load
over public streets, alleys or places to provide warning flags, lights or
reflectors in such locations on the building or oversize load as to indicate
clearly the existence of a hazard in all directions from which traffic may
approach. Lights and reflectors will be used between sunset and sunrise. In
addition to the warning flags, lights and reflectors required above, a flagger
shall be stationed approximately 300 feet from the building or oversize load in
the direction of any normal traffic flow. In all cases where a building or
oversize load projects over the centerline of the street, a flagger shall be
stationed 300 feet ahead of, and another flagger 300 feet behind, the building
or oversize load. The Director of Public Services is authorized to require such
additional warning and safety measures as he or she may deem necessary to
safeguard the public.
(Ord. 2005, passed 11-24-1953; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 8.66.070 SURETY BOND REQUIRED.
   No permit shall be granted under this chapter unless and until the applicant
has executed a good and sufficient surety bond to the city in a sum designated
by the Director of Public Services, but not less than $1,000, conditioned that
the applicant will hold and save the city and all officers thereof harmless
from any and all costs, damages or expenses that the city or any of its
officers may incur or be obligated to pay by reason of the granting of such
permit, including damage to streets, trees and other city owned property.
(Ord. 2005, passed 11-24-1953; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 8.66.080 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is
guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 2005, passed 11-24-1953; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 8.68: ETCHING CREAM, AEROSOL CONTAINERS AND CERTAIN MARKER PENS
Section
   
8.68.010   Inaccessibility to public
   
8.68.020   Violation
§ 8.68.010 INACCESSIBILITY TO PUBLIC.
   Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial
establishment selling etching cream, aerosol containers or marker pens with
tips exceeding four millimeters in width, containing anything other than a
solution which can be removed with water after it dries, shall store or cause
such etching cream, aerosol containers or marker pens to be stored in an area
viewable by, but not accessible to, the public in the regular course of
business without employee assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of such
etching cream, marker pens or aerosol containers. For purposes of this section,
ETCHING CREAM means any caustic cream, gel, liquid or solution capable, by
means of a chemical action, of defacing, damaging or destroying hard surfaces
in a manner similar to acid.
(Ord. MC-1145, passed 6-17-2003; Ord. MC-867, passed 4-6-1993)
§ 8.68.020 VIOLATION.
   Any violation of §
8.68.010 is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. MC-867, passed 4-6-1993)
CHAPTER 8.69: GRAFFITI
Section
   
8.69.010   Public funds for removal of graffiti
   
8.69.020   Reserved
   
8.69.030   Nuisance; notice to abate; abatement upon consent
   
8.69.040   Notice to remove graffiti; protests and notice of hearing thereon
   
8.69.050   Hearing by Director of Public Services - appeal to Mayor and City
Council
   
8.69.060   Abatement of nuisance
   
8.69.070   Abatement of nuisance by property owner - time limit
   
8.69.080   Assessment for abatement by city - filing of objection
   
8.69.090   Possession of instruments of graffiti by juveniles prohibited
§ 8.69.010 PUBLIC FUNDS FOR REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI.
   Public funds, to the extent they are available, may be used for the removal
of graffiti, as described in §
8.69.030(A), with the written consent, waiver of liability and agreement to
hold the city harmless from any and all damages signed by the owner(s), owner’s
(s’) agent(s) or occupier(s) of the property on which the graffiti appears, if
such individuals assure the city and confirm that they have the legal authority
to execute such consent, waiver and agreement. If consent and waiver are not
obtained, or if public funds are not available, the Director of Public Services
shall follow the procedure contained in §§
8.69.030 et seq.
(Ord. 3675, passed 9-21-1977; Ord. MC-658, passed 4-19-1989)
§ 8.69.020 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-658, passed 4-19-1989)
§ 8.69.030 NUISANCE; NOTICE TO ABATE; ABATEMENT UPON CONSENT.
   (A)   The existence of graffiti, writings and other inscribed material,
other than signs authorized under this code, on public or private property,
including on buildings, walls, fences, curbs and other structures, in a place
visible to the public, from a public street, alley or other place open to the
public, is declared a public nuisance, and the periodic removal thereof is
necessary to protect the health, safety and public welfare of the inhabitants
of the city.
   (B)   Whenever any of the public nuisances mentioned in division (A) above
exist in the city, the Director of Public Services, or his or her designee, may
find and declare the same to be a public nuisance under the provisions of this
chapter and may order the abatement of such public nuisance as hereinafter
provided. Special priority shall be given to the abatement of any writings or
symbols which are offensive to a substantial number or class of citizens, or
any graffiti or writing which demeans any individual, or causes or is likely to
cause a breach of the peace.
   (C)   Any owner whose property is found to be or contain a public nuisance
by the Director of Public Services shall have the right to request a hearing to
determine whether in fact a public nuisance exists as hereinafter provided. The
owner may specifically consent to removal, in which event the Director of
Public Services is authorized to immediately abate the nuisance.
(Ord. MC-370, passed 5-22-1984)
§ 8.69.040 NOTICE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI; PROTESTS AND NOTICE OF HEARING THEREON.
   (A)   When the Director of Public Services finds a nuisance, as described in
§
8.69.030, to exist, he or she shall cause a “notice to remove graffiti” to be
given in regard to all property on which, or abutting that property on which,
the nuisance exists. A notice shall be mailed to each property owner as his,
her or its name and address appears in the current records of a title company
or the tax assessment rolls of the county, or as may be otherwise known. The
notice shall contain a date, a description of the property by street
designation and any other information deemed appropriate by the Director of
Public Services to designate the location from which graffiti, writings or
other inscriptions are to be removed. The notice shall be in substantially the
following form:
“NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN pursuant to Section
8.69.040 of the San Bernardino Municipal Code that the Director of Public
Services of the City of San Bernardino has determined that a nuisance exists on
or abutting the property described in this Notice, or on the parkway thereof.
The nuisance consists of graffiti, writings or other inscriptions, on
buildings, walls, fences, curbs or other structures on such property or
abutting such property. You must abate or remove this nuisance, by removal or
covering of such graffiti, writings or other inscriptions. If you do not remove
such nuisance, the nuisance may be removed and abated by the City of San
Bernardino, without further notice to you, and for that purpose officers,
agents, employees or contractors working under the direction of the Director of
Public Services may enter upon your property to abate such nuisance.
Any person objecting to this determination of a nuisance or the proposed
removal and abatement of said nuisance shall file a written protest with the
City Clerk not later than five days from the date of mailing of this Notice.
The City Clerk shall transmit such protest promptly to the Director of Public
Services, who shall promptly schedule a date, time and place for hearing, and
shall give notice thereof to the protesting property owner or other protester.
The Director of Public Services will personally, or by an official hearing
officer designated by him or her, hear any protests and consider any
information, evidence or argument concerning the existence of such alleged
nuisance, and after having given to the property owner, or his or her
representative, the reasonable opportunity to be heard, shall render a decision
as to whether a nuisance exists. If a timely protest has been filed, you or
your agent may appear at said hearing and be heard and may present and hear
evidence concerning the existence of the alleged nuisance and the proposed
abatement.
If you desire to have the City remove such nuisance, you may notify the
Director of Public Services that you consent to abatement of the nuisance by
the City.”
   (B)   In addition to mailing the notice in the manner and form required
herein, such notice may (permissive) be conspicuously posted on or adjacent to
the property from which the nuisance is to be abated.
(Ord. MC-370, passed 5-22-1984)
§ 8.69.050 HEARING BY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICES - APPEAL TO MAYOR AND CITY
COUNCIL.
   (A)   At the time set for hearing, the Director of Public Services, or his
or her designee, shall hear and consider all objections or protests to the
finding of nuisance and proposed abatement of the nuisance, and may continue
the hearing from time to time. The hearing officer shall consider, among other
things, whether the expense necessarily incurred in complying with the
ordinance and the sanctions imposed for non-compliance are reasonable in
relation to the health, safety and public welfare interest being protected;
whether the existence of graffiti, writings or other inscriptions in its
present location is in fact a public nuisance, and has the effect of
diminishing property values of the neighborhood and contributes to community
blight; and shall consider the effect of the existence of such graffiti,
writings or other inscriptions on a normal person of normal sensibility, and
the environment in which the graffiti, writings or other inscriptions exists
including, for instance, whether in an urban or rural setting.
   (B)   The Director of Public Services, or his or her designee, shall not
find a nuisance to exist unless such hearing officer finds the existence of an
injurious effect upon the public in general. The decision of the Director of
Public Services, or his or her designee, is final, subject to the right of the
property owner to appeal to the Mayor and City Council pursuant to
Chapter 2.64, except that the notice of appeal must be filed within ten days of
the hearing, or within ten days of the mailing of notice of the decision by the
Director of Public Services, whichever occurs last. If a decision is rendered
at the time of the hearing, and a representative of the property owner was
present at such hearing, no mailing of the decision shall be required. The
decision of the Mayor and City Council, upon any appeal, shall be final and
conclusive. Any person failing to protest, as authorized in §
8.69.030, or failing to appeal after the decision of the Director of Public
Services shall be deemed to have waived any and all objections, and the
Director of Public Services shall be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to
abate the nuisance and have the work of removal performed.
(Ord. MC-370, passed 5-22-1984)
§ 8.69.060 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   Upon acquiring jurisdiction, the Director of Public Services shall abate the
nuisance, and he or she and his or her assistants or deputies, or any person,
firm or corporation under contract to do the work, are expressly authorized to
enter upon private property for that purpose.
(Ord. MC-370, passed 5-22-1984)
§ 8.69.070 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY PROPERTY OWNER - TIME LIMIT.
   Any property owner shall have the right to have any such nuisance removed or
abated at his or her own expense provided the same is done within ten days
after the mailing of the “notice to remove graffiti,” as provided in §
8.69.080; provided such abatement is performed to the satisfaction of the
Director of Public Services. If additional time is desired in the order to
remove the graffiti writings or other inscriptions, a request therefor shall be
made to the Director of Public Services, who may grant additional time within
which the property owner shall have the right to have any such nuisance removed
at his or her own expense. Upon expiration of such additional time, however, if
the nuisance is not removed, the Director of Public Services shall be deemed to
have acquired jurisdiction to abate the nuisance without further notice or
hearing and shall have the authority to proceed to abate the nuisance.
(Ord. MC-370, passed 5-22-1984)
§ 8.69.080 ASSESSMENT FOR ABATEMENT BY CITY - FILING OF OBJECTION.
   The Director of Public Services shall, upon completion of the graffiti
abatement, itemize the costs thereof, including incidental expenses which, if
unpaid, shall be assessed against and become a lien upon the property on which
the nuisance was abated to be collected at the time and in the manner of the
real property taxes by the Tax Collector, pursuant to the procedure set forth
in Chapter 3.68. The Director of Public Services shall forthwith initiate
proceedings before the Board of Building Commissioners under Chapter 8.30 for
determination and collection of the assessment for costs of abatement.
(Ord. MC-658, passed 4-19-1989; Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015)
Editor’s note:
   Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015 repealed/deleted Chapter 3.68 and stated that
any remaining provisions of the municipal code that reference it should now be
deemed to instead reference
Chapter 8.30, which it also amended.
§ 8.69.090 POSSESSION OF INSTRUMENTS OF GRAFFITI BY JUVENILES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any minor to have, in his or her possession, the
below described instruments of graffiti while on any public highway, street,
alleyway, park, playground, swimming pool, public buildings or any area open to
the public, whether such juvenile is or is not in any automobile, vehicle or
other conveyance:
      (1)   Any spray can containing anything other than a solution which can
be removed by water after it dries. These include paint, undercoating, spray
insulation and others having the same effect.
      (2)   Any spray can tips, other than those affixed to a spray can not
meeting the description of §
8.60.090(A).
      (3)   Any marker pens containing anything other than a solution which can
be removed with water after it dries.
      (4)   Any container containing anything other than solution that can be
removed with water after it dries and which can be used to apply that solution.
This includes acrylic paint tubes, oil paint tubes, shoe dyes and bottles and
cans of such solutions.
      (5)   Objects capable of etching glass or ceramic surfaces, including,
without limitation, bits, grinding stones, glass cutters, scribes, broken spark
plug ceramic, chisels and any solution capable of etching these surfaces when
applied including acids and etching baths.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person under the
age of 18 years who is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or under the
supervision of an adult teacher.
(Ord. MC-904, passed 5-18-1994; Ord. MC-1087, passed 9-20-2000)
CHAPTER 8.72: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1121, passed 3-19-2002)
CHAPTER 8.73: NO SMOKING IN PARKS
Section
   
8.73.010   Definitions
   
8.73.020   Smoking prohibited within 25 feet of playground or tot lot sandbox
area
   
8.73.030   Sale of tobacco products through self-service displays prohibited
   
8.73.040   Smoking in outdoor athletic recreation areas, sports centers and
sports facilities prohibited
   
8.73.050   No smoking in any public park
§ 8.73.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIGAR. Shall have the definition as currently set forth in Cal. Health and
Safety Code, § 104550, or its successor section, as amended.
   CIGARETTE.
      (1)   Any product that contains nicotine, is intended to be burned or
heated under ordinary conditions of use and consists of or contains:
         (a)   Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not
containing tobacco;
         (b)   Tobacco in any form that is functional in the product, which,
because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler or its
packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers
as a cigarette; or
         (c)   Any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco,
which, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler or its
packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers
as a CIGARETTE described in this section.
      (2)   CIGARETTE also includes “roll-your-own” tobacco, meaning any
tobacco, which, because of its appearance, type, packaging or labeling, is
suitable for use and likely to be offered to, or purchased by consumers as
tobacco for making CIGARETTES.
   PLAYGROUND. Any park or recreational area specifically designed to be used
by children that has play equipment installed, or any similar facility located
on public or private school grounds, or on any city park grounds.
   PUBLIC PARK, PARK or similar term. Includes, but is not limited to, all
grounds, roadways, avenues, park facilities, municipal parks and playground
areas, or portions thereof, under the supervision of or otherwise operated by
the Parks and Recreation Department.
   SMOKE or SMOKING. The igniting, inhaling, exhaling or carrying of any
burning cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or the igniting, inhaling, exhaling or
carrying a pipe or other device for smoking, containing any burning substance
of any kind, including, but not limited to tobacco, or any other weed or plant.
   TOT LOT SANDBOX AREA. A designated play area within a public park for the
use by children under five years of age. Where the area is not contained by a
fence, the boundary of a TOT LOT SANDBOX AREA shall be defined by the edge of
the resilient surface of safety material, such as concrete or wood, or any
other material surrounding the TOT LOT SANDBOX AREA.
(Ord. MC-1319, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 8.73.020 SMOKING PROHIBITED WITHIN 25 FEET OF PLAYGROUND OR TOT LOT SANDBOX
AREA.
   (A)   No person shall smoke a cigarette, cigar or other tobacco-related
product within 25 feet of the boundaries of any playground or tot lot sandbox
area.
   (B)   No person shall dispose of cigarette butts, cigar butts or any other
tobacco related waste within 25 feet of any playground or tot lot sandbox area.
   (C)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction,
punishable in accordance with §
1.12.010.
§ 8.73.030 SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS THROUGH SELF-SERVICE DISPLAYS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY means the open
display of tobacco products in a manner that is accessible to the general
public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer.
   (B)   It shall be prohibited for any person engaged in the retail sale of
tobacco products to sell, offer for sale or display for sale any tobacco
product by self-service display.
   (C)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction,
punishable in accordance with §
1.12.010.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to any “retail or wholesale tobacco
shop,” meaning any business establishment the main purpose of which is the sale
of tobacco products, including, but not limited to, cigars, pipe tobacco and
smoking accessories.
§ 8.73.040 SMOKING IN OUTDOOR ATHLETIC RECREATION AREAS, SPORTS CENTERS AND
SPORTS FACILITIES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, OUTDOOR ATHLETIC RECREATION AREA,
SPORTS CENTERS and SPORTS FACILITIES shall include, but not be limited to, any
stadium, gymnasium, swimming pool, playing field, health spa or other similar
place, open to the air, where members of the general public assemble to either
engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic activities or witness
sports events.
   (B)   It shall be prohibited for any person to smoke any tobacco product in
an outdoor athletic recreation area, sports center or sports facility, except
in the areas designated by the facility provider.
   (C)   Publicly owned outdoor athletic recreation areas, sports centers and
sports facilities shall designate one or more areas in which the general public
is not prohibited from smoking.
   (D)   Privately owned athletic recreation areas, sports centers and sports
facilities, or publicly owned athletic recreation areas, sports centers and
sports facilities, that are leased by a private entity for any term greater
than one year, may designate one or more areas in which the general public is
not prohibited from smoking.
   (E)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction,
punishable in accordance with §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 3653, passed 7-15-1977; Ord. MC-623, passed 4-19-1988; Ord. MC-905,
passed 6-8-1994; Ord. MC-1118, passed 3-19-2002; Ord. MC-1119, passed 3-19-
2002; Ord. MC-1122, passed 3-19-2002)
§ 8.73.050 NO SMOKING IN ANY PUBLIC PARK.
   (A)   It is made a violation of law for any person to smoke or engage in the
act of smoking in any public park.
   (B)   It is made a violation of law for any person to dispose of any
cigarette, cigar or tobacco, or any part of a cigarette, cigar or tobacco, or a
pipe or other device for smoking, in any public park, except in a waste
disposal container designated for such purpose.
   (C)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction,
punishable in accordance with §
1.12.010. Punishment under this section shall not preclude punishment under any
other applicable provision of law.
(Ord. MC-1319, passed 11-16-2009)
CHAPTER 8.75: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-511, passed 4-22-1986)
CHAPTER 8.78: AUTOMATIC DIALING AND TAPED MESSAGE ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
8.78.010   Automatic dialing into city line prohibited
   
8.78.020   Live answering service
   
8.78.030   Permit to install - requirements
§ 8.78.010 AUTOMATIC DIALING INTO CITY LINE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to install, use or cause to be used any
telephonic device which is activated electronically to automatically dial a
public telephone line of the city.
(Ord. 3220, passed 12-21-1971; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 8.78.020 LIVE ANSWERING SERVICE.
   Any automatic telephonic dialing system shall dial to, and the message shall
be received by, a live answering service, such as a private alarm dispatch
center. In no event shall any automatic direct dialing be permitted into a
public telephone line to the city.
(Ord. 3220, passed 12-21-1971)
§ 8.78.030 PERMIT TO INSTALL - REQUIREMENTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to install, use or cause to be used any
telephonic device which is activated electronically to automatically dial a
telephone within the city without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of
Police or Fire Chief to install and use such telephonic device. The fee for
such permit shall be the sum of $5. The Chief of Police shall review all
requests for telephonic burglar alarms, and the Fire Chief shall review all
requests for telephonic fire alarms. Before a permit may be issued, the
following requirements shall first be complied with: the current subscriber of
the telephone which contains an automatic device, the telephone number and the
location of such telephone shall be on file at the City Police Department or
City Fire Department. The current subscriber of the telephone which receives
calls from an automatic telephone dialing system, the telephone number and the
location of such telephone shall be file at the City Police Department or City
Fire Department.
(Ord. 3220, passed 12-21-1971; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 8.79: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
Part I. Scope and Administration
Article 101. General Provisions
   
8.79.010   Title
   
8.79.020   Statutory authority
   
8.79.030   Scope
   
8.79.040   Purposes and objectives
   
8.79.050   Coordination with the California Building Standards Code
   
8.79.060   Warning
   
8.79.070   Disclaimer of liability
   
8.79.080   Other laws
   
8.79.090   Abrogation and greater restrictions
Article 102. Applicability
   
8.79.100   General applicability
   
8.79.110   Establishment of flood hazard areas
   
8.79.120   Interpretation
Article 103. Duties and Powers of the Floodplain Administrator
   
8.79.130   Designation
   
8.79.140   General authority
   
8.79.150   Coordination
   
8.79.160   Duties
   
8.79.170   Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations
   
8.79.180   Department records
Article 104. Permits for Floodplain Development
   
8.79.190   Permits required
   
8.79.200   Application for permit
   
8.79.210   Validity of permit
   
8.79.220   Other permits required
   
8.79.230   Expiration
   
8.79.240   Suspension or revocation
   
8.79.250   Appeals of decisions
Article 105. Site Plans and Construction Documents
   
8.79.260   Information for development in flood hazard areas
   
8.79.270   Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations
(approximate Zone A)
   
8.79.280   Additional analyses and certifications
   
8.79.290   Submission of additional data
Article 106. Inspections
   
8.79.300   Inspections, in general
   
8.79.310   Inspections of development other than buildings and structures
   
8.79.320   Inspections of manufactured homes installations
   
8.79.330   Buildings and structures
Article 107. Variances
   
8.79.340   Nature of variances
   
8.79.350   Variances; general
   
8.79.360   Limitations on authority
   
8.79.370   Records
   
8.79.380   Historic structures
   
8.79.390   Restrictions in floodways
   
8.79.400   Functionally dependent uses
   
8.79.410   Considerations for issuance of variances
   
8.79.420   Conditions for issuance of variances
Article 108.Violations
   
8.79.430   Violations
   
8.79.440   Authority
   
8.79.450   Unlawful continuance
Part II. Definitions
Article 201. Definitions
   
8.79.460   General
   
8.79.470   Definitions
Part III. Flood Resistant Development
Article 301. Buildings and Structures
   
8.79.480   Requirements for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas
   
8.79.490   Detached garages and accessory storage structures
   
8.79.500   Utility and Miscellaneous Group U
Article 302. Subdivisions
   
8.79.510   Minimum requirements
   
8.79.520   Subdivision requirements
Article 303. Site Improvements, Utilities and Limitations
   
8.79.530   Minimum requirements
   
8.79.540   Sanitary sewer facilities
   
8.79.550   Water supply facilities
   
8.79.560   Development in floodways
   
8.79.570   Limitations on placement of fill
Article 304. Installation of Manufactured Homes
   
8.79.580   Installation
   
8.79.590   Foundations
   
8.79.600   Anchoring
   
8.79.610   General elevation requirement
   
8.79.620   Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks
and subdivisions
   
8.79.630   Flood damage-resistant materials
   
8.79.640   Enclosures
   
8.79.650   Protection of mechanical equipment and outside appliances
Article 305. Recreational Vehicles
   
8.79.660   Temporary placement
   
8.79.670   Permanent placement
Article 306. Other Development
   
8.79.680   General requirements for other development
   
8.79.690   Tanks
   
8.79.700   Requirements for temporary structures and temporary storage in flood
hazard areas
   
8.79.710   Fences in floodways
   
8.79.720   Oil derricks
   
8.79.730   Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in floodways
   
8.79.740   Roads and watercourse crossings in floodways
   
8.79.750   Swimming pools
Article 307. Flood Control Projects
   
8.79.760   Flood control projects; general
   
8.79.770   Flood control projects; applications
PART I. SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE 101. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 8.79.010 TITLE.
   This chapter, in combination with the flood provisions of the California
Building Standards Code (consisting of Part 2 (building), Part 2.5
(residential) and Part 10 (existing building) of Cal. Code of Regulations,
Title 24, and related codes, hereinafter “building codes”), shall be known as
the “Floodplain Management Regulations” of the city.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
Cross-reference:
   Definition of Building Code, see §
8.79.470
§ 8.79.020 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   The legislature of the state has, in Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 65302, 65560 and
65800, conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its
citizenry.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.030 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter, in combination with the flood provisions of
the building codes, shall apply to all proposed development entirely or
partially in flood hazard areas established in §
8.79.110.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.040 PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES.
   The purposes and objectives of this chapter and the flood load and flood
resistant construction requirements of the building codes are to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific flood hazard areas through the
establishment of comprehensive regulations for management of flood hazard areas
designed to:
   (A)   Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service
during times of flooding;
   (B)   Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to
prevent or minimize future flood damage;
   (C)   Manage the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial
functions of the floodplain;
   (D)   Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation,
drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials and other development
which may increase flood damage or erosion potential;
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
divert floodwater or increase flood hazards;
   (F)   Contribute to improved construction techniques in the floodplain;
   (G)   Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities;
   (H)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood hazard areas;
   (I)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding;
   (J)   Ensure that property owners, occupants and potential owners are aware
of property located in flood hazard areas;
   (K)   Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood
control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and
   (L)   Meet the requirements of the national flood insurance program for
community participation as set forth in 44 C.F.R. § 59.22.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.050 COORDINATION WITH THE CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS CODE.
   Pursuant to the requirement established in state statute that the city
administer and enforce the California Building Standards Code, the Mayor and
City Council acknowledges that the building codes contain certain provisions
that apply to the design and construction of buildings and structures in flood
hazard areas. Therefore, this chapter is intended to be administered and
enforced in conjunction with the building codes.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
Cross-reference:
   California Building Standards Code, see §
8.79.010
§ 8.79.060 WARNING.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter and the building
codes is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur.
Flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. Enforcement of
this chapter and the building codes does not imply that land outside the
special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard
areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and
base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood
insurance rate maps and the requirements of 44 C.F.R. pts. 59 and 60 may be
revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to
revise this chapter to remain eligible for participation in the national flood
insurance program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use or future use is
implied or expressed by compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.070 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   These regulations shall not create liability on the part of Mayor and City
Council, any officer or employee thereof, the state or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from reliance on this
chapter, or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. The Floodplain
Administrator and any employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter,
while acting for the community in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of the duties required by this chapter or other pertinent law or
ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is relieved from
personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result
of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official
duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act
performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and
under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by a legal
representative of the community until the final termination of the proceedings.
The Floodplain Administrator and any subordinate shall not be liable for cost
in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.080 OTHER LAWS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions
of local, state or federal law.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.090 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   These regulations supersede any ordinance in effect in flood hazard areas.
However, this chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing ordinances, including land development regulations, subdivision
regulations, zoning ordinances, storm water management regulations or building
codes, nor any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. In the event
of an overlap or conflict between this chapter and any other ordinance, code,
regulation, easement, covenant or deed restriction, the more restrictive shall
govern.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
ARTICLE 102. APPLICABILITY
§ 8.79.100 GENERAL APPLICABILITY.
   These regulations, in conjunction with the building codes, provide minimum
requirements for development located in flood hazard areas, including the
subdivision of land; filling, grading and other site improvements; installation
of utilities; installation, placement and replacement of manufactured homes;
placement of recreational vehicles; installation of tanks; temporary structures
and temporary or permanent storage; utility and miscellaneous Group U buildings
and structures; certain building work exempt from permit under the building
codes; and flood control projects.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.110 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The “Flood Insurance Study for the County and Incorporated Areas,” dated
July 16, 1979, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the
accompanying flood insurance rate maps (“FIRM”), and all subsequent amendments
and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this chapter
and serve as the basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Where the building
code establishes flood hazard areas, such areas are established by this
section. Additional maps and studies, when specifically adopted, supplement the
FIS and FIRMs to establish additional flood hazard areas. Maps and studies that
establish flood hazard areas are on file at the following address: 825 E Third
St., San Bernardino, CA 92415, County of San Bernardino, Department of Public
Works.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.120 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
ARTICLE 103. DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR
§ 8.79.130 DESIGNATION.
   The City Engineer is designated the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain
Administrator shall have the authority to delegate the performance of certain
duties to other employees.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.140 GENERAL AUTHORITY.
   The Floodplain Administrator is authorized and directed to administer and
enforce this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to
render interpretations of this chapter and to establish policies and procedures
in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations,
policies and procedures shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of this
chapter and the flood provisions of the building code and shall not have the
effect of waiving specific requirements without the granting of a variance
pursuant to Article 107. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to waive
the submission of site plans, construction documents and other data that are
required by this chapter but that are not required to be prepared by a
qualified state licensed land surveyor or civil engineer when it is found that
the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such
submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.150 COORDINATION.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall coordinate with and provide comments to
the Building Official to administer and enforce the flood provisions of the
building code and to ensure compliance with the applicable provisions of this
chapter. The Floodplain Administrator and the Building Official have the
authority to establish written procedures for reviewing applications and
conducting inspections for buildings and for administering and documenting
determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant
to §
8.79.170.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.160 DUTIES.
   The Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices
of the community, shall:
   (A)   Review all permit applications and plans to determine whether proposed
development is located in flood hazard areas;
   (B)   Review all applications and plans for development in flood hazard
areas for compliance with this chapter;
   (C)   Review, in coordination with the Building Official, required design
certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the building code
to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete;
   (D)   Review applications and plans for modification of any existing
development in flood hazard areas for compliance with this chapter;
   (E)   Require development in flood hazard areas to be reasonably safe from
flooding and to be designed and constructed with methods, practices and
materials that minimize flood damage;
   (F)   Interpret flood hazard area boundaries and provide available flood
elevation and flood hazard information;
   (G)   Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from
other sources or developed by the applicant;
   (H)   Complete the appropriate section of the Department of Housing and
Community Development Floodplain Ordinance Compliance Certification for
Manufactured Home/Mobile Home Installations when submitted by applicants;
   (I)   Review requests submitted to the Building Official seeking approval to
modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant
construction requirements of the building code to determine whether such
requests require consideration as a variance pursuant to Article 107;
   (J)   Coordinate with the Building Official and others to identify and
investigate damaged buildings located in flood hazard areas and inform owners
of the requirement to obtain permits for repairs;
   (K)   Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and
information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps when the
analyses indicate changes in base flood elevations, flood hazard area
boundaries or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six
months of such data becoming available;
   (L)   Require applicants who propose alteration of a watercourse to notify
adjacent communities and the NFIP State Coordinating Agency, and to submit
copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(“FEMA”);
   (M)   Inspect development in accordance with Article 106 and inspect flood
hazard areas to determine when development is undertaken without issuance of
permits;
   (N)   Prepare comments and recommendations for consideration when applicants
seek variances for development other than buildings in accordance with Article
107;
   (O)   Cite violations in accordance with Article 108; and
   (P)   Notify FEMA when the corporate boundaries of the city have been
modified and provide a map and legal description of the changes in the
corporate boundaries.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.170 SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT AND SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.
   For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures,
including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, additions,
rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial
damage and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures,
the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official,
shall:
   (A)   Estimate the market value or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
   (B)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair the
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, when applicable, to the market value of the building
or structure;
   (C)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
   (D)   Notify the applicant when it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the building code is
required and notify the applicant when it is determined that work does not
constitute substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.180 DEPARTMENT RECORDS.
   In addition to the requirements of the building code and this chapter, and
regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public
records, the Floodplain Administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and
make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the
administration of this chapter and the flood provisions of the building codes,
including flood insurance studies and flood insurance rate maps; documents from
FEMA that amend or revise FIRMs; records of issuance of permits and denial of
permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial
improvement or repair of substantial damage; required certifications and
documentation specified by the building codes and this chapter; notifications
to adjacent communities, FEMA and the state related to alterations of
watercourses; assurance that the flood carrying capacity of altered waterways
will be maintained; documentation related to variances, including justification
for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to
this chapter and the flood resistant provisions of the building codes.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
ARTICLE 104. PERMITS FOR FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT
§ 8.79.190 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Any person, owner or authorized agent who intends to conduct any development
in a flood hazard area shall first make an application to the Floodplain
Administrator and shall obtain the required permit for floodplain development.
No permit shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. No
building permit shall be issued based on conditional letters of map revision
issued by FEMA. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that
includes a building or structure, the Floodplain Administrator may determine a
permit for floodplain development is required in addition to a building permit.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.200 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   The applicant shall file an application, in writing, on a form
furnished by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   The information provided shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit;
      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be
conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will
readily identify and definitely locate the site;
      (3)   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development
is intended;
      (4)   Be accompanied by a site plan, and construction documents, as
specified in
Article 105, including grading, excavation and filling plans and other
information deemed appropriate by the Floodplain Administrator;
      (5)   State the valuation of the proposed work;
      (6)   Be signed by the applicant or the applicant’s authorized agent; and
      (7)   Include such other data and information required by the Floodplain
Administrator to demonstrate compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.210 VALIDITY OF PERMIT.
   The issuance of a permit for floodplain development under this chapter or
the building codes shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of,
any violation of this chapter, the building code or any other ordinance of the
community. The issuance of a permit for floodplain development based on
submitted documents and information shall not prevent the Floodplain
Administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. The
Floodplain Administrator is authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a
structure or site which is in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.220 OTHER PERMITS REQUIRED.
   The applicant shall obtain all other required state and federal permits
prior to initiating work authorized by this chapter and shall provide
documentation of such permits to the Floodplain Administrator. Such permits
include, but are not limited to, the State Water Resources Control Board for
activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction
with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; § 404 of the Clean Water Act, being 33
U.S.C. § 1344.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.230 EXPIRATION.
   A permit for floodplain development shall become invalid when the proposed
development is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or when the
work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the
work commences. Extensions shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to grant, in writing,
one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each, unless
FEMA has issued notification of revision to the flood insurance rate study and
flood insurance rate maps that alter the flood hazard area or floodway
boundaries, flood zones or base flood elevations, in which case the permit is
invalid.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.240 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit for
floodplain development issued under this chapter wherever the permit is issued
in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or
in violation of this chapter or any ordinance or code of this community.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.250 APPEALS OF DECISIONS.
   When it is alleged, there is an error in any decision or determination made
by the Floodplain Administrator in the interpretation or enforcement of this
chapter, such decision or determination may be appealed to the Council,
Commission and Development Review Committee (“DRC”) by filing a written appeal
setting forth the reasons of the appeal.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
ARTICLE 105. SITE PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
§ 8.79.260 INFORMATION FOR DEVELOPMENT IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the
requirements of this chapter shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as
applicable to the proposed development:
   (A)   Delineation of flood hazard areas; floodway boundaries and flood zone
(s); base flood elevation(s); ground elevations; proposed filling, grading and
excavation; and drainage patterns and facilities when necessary for review of
the proposed development;
   (B)   Where base flood elevations or floodway data are not included on the
FIRM or in the flood insurance study, they shall be established in accordance
with §§
8.79.270 or
8.79.280;
   (C)   Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place
will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood
elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such
elevations shall be established in accordance with §
8.79.270(B);
   (D)   Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures; locations
of water supply, sanitary sewer and other utilities; and locations of existing
buildings and structures;
   (E)   Location, extent, amount and proposed final grades of any filling,
grading or excavation;
   (F)   Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type and source
of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended
purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the
minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose; and
   (G)   Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a
watercourse.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.270 INFORMATION IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS WITHOUT BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS
(APPROXIMATE ZONE A).
   Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation
data have not been provided, the Floodplain Administrator is authorized to:
   (A)   Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared by
a qualified state licensed civil engineer in accordance with currently accepted
engineering practices. Such analyses shall be performed and sealed by a
qualified state licensed civil engineer. Studies, analyses and computations
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow review and approval by the
Floodplain Administrator. The accuracy of data submitted for such determination
shall be the responsibility of the applicant;
   (B)   Obtain, review and provide to applicants base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or
require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal or state agency or other source;
   (C)   Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from
another source, where the available data are deemed by the Floodplain
Administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions or where the
available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or
otherwise inadequate:
      (1)   Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data in
accordance with §
8.79.270(A); or
      (2)   Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest
adjacent grade at the location of the development; provided there is no
evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet.
   (D)   Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a
request for a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the
analyses shall be prepared by a qualified state licensed civil engineer in a
format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.280 ADDITIONAL ANALYSES AND CERTIFICATIONS.
   As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development
activity, and in addition to the requirements of this chapter, the applicant
shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a qualified state
licensed civil engineer for submission with the site plan and construction
documents.
   (A)   For development activities proposed to be located in a floodway, a
floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the
proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations;
where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do
increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to
FEMA, as specified in §
8.79.290, and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, when issued
by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents.
   (B)   For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood
hazard area where base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance
study or on the FIRM but floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard
area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one
foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in
isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in
flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH.
   (C)   For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in
accordance with standard engineering practices that demonstrates the flood-
carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will
not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be
maintained in a manner which preserves the channel’s flood-carrying capacity.
The applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in §
8.79.290. The applicant shall notify the chief executive officer of adjacent
communities and the State Department of Water Resources. The Floodplain
Administrator shall maintain a copy of the notification in the permit records
and shall submit a copy to FEMA.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.290 SUBMISSION OF ADDITIONAL DATA.
   When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies and
additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has
the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood
elevations, change floodway boundaries or change boundaries of flood hazard
areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The
analyses shall be prepared by a qualified state licensed civil engineer in a
format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be
the responsibility of the applicant. Provided FEMA issues a conditional letter
of map revision, construction of proposed flood control projects and land
preparation for development are permitted, including clearing, excavation,
grading and filling. Permits for construction of buildings shall not be issued
until the applicant satisfies the FEMA requirements for issuance of a letter of
map revision.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
ARTICLE 106. INSPECTIONS
§ 8.79.300 INSPECTIONS, IN GENERAL.
   Development for which a permit for floodplain development is required shall
be subject to inspection. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be
construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this chapter or
the Building Code. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel
the provisions of this chapter or the building code or other ordinances shall
not be valid.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.310 INSPECTIONS OF DEVELOPMENT OTHER THAN BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall make, or cause to be made, inspections of
all development other than buildings and structures that is authorized by
issuance of a permit for floodplain development under this chapter. The
Floodplain Administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas, from time to time,
to determine when development is undertaken without issuance of a permit.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.320 INSPECTIONS OF MANUFACTURED HOMES INSTALLATIONS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall make, or cause to be made, inspections of
installation and replacement of manufactured homes in flood hazard areas
authorized by issuance of a permit for floodplain development under this
chapter. Upon installation of a manufactured home and receipt of the elevation
certification required in §
8.79.580, the Floodplain Administrator shall inspect the installation or have
the installation inspected.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.330 BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   The Building Official shall make, or cause to be made, inspections for
buildings and structures in flood hazard areas authorized by permit, in
accordance with the Building Code.
   (A)   Lowest floor elevation. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including
the basement, and prior to further vertical construction, certification of the
elevation required in the Building Code shall be prepared by a state licensed
land surveyor or civil engineer and submitted to the Building Official.
   (B)   Final inspection. Prior to the final inspection, certification of the
elevation required in the Building Code shall be prepared by a state licensed
land surveyor or civil engineer and submitted to the Building Official.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
ARTICLE 107. VARIANCES
§ 8.79.340 NATURE OF VARIANCES.
   (A)   The considerations and conditions for variances set forth in this
article are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain
to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be issued
for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that
complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional
hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The
characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent
parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the
structure, its inhabitants or the property owners. The issuance of a variance
is for floodplain management purposes only. Federal flood insurance premium
rates are determined by the national flood insurance program according to
actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.
   (B)   It is the duty of the Mayor and City Council of the city to promote
public health, safety and welfare and minimize losses from flooding. This duty
is so compelling and the implications of property damage and the cost of
insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from
the elevation or other requirements in the building codes should be quite rare.
The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage, and
minimizing recovery costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering, can only be met
when variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance requirements in
this chapter are detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met
before a variance can be properly issued. The criteria are designed to screen
out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more
appropriate.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.350 VARIANCES; GENERAL.
   The Development Review Committee (“DRC”) shall hear and decide requests for
variances from the strict application of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.360 LIMITATIONS ON AUTHORITY.
   The Development Review Committee (“DRC”) shall base its determination on
technical justifications submitted by applicants; the considerations and
conditions set forth in this article; the comments and recommendations of the
Floodplain Administrator and Building Official, as applicable; and has the
right to attach such conditions to variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes and objectives of this chapter and the Building Code.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.370 RECORDS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a permanent record of all
variance actions, including justification for issuance.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.380 HISTORIC STRUCTURES.
   A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement or
rehabilitation of a historic structure upon a determination that the proposed
repair, improvement or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. When
the proposed work precludes the structure’s continued designation as a historic
building, a variance shall not be granted and the structure and any repair,
improvement and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the
Building Code.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.390 RESTRICTIONS IN FLOODWAYS.
   A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway
when any increase in flood levels would result during the base flood discharge,
as evidenced by the applicable analyses required in §
8.79.280(A).
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.400 FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USES.
   A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial
improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided
the criteria in § 1612 of the Building Code (CCR Title 24 Part 2) or § R322 of
the Residential Code (CCR Title 24 Part 2.5) are met, as applicable, and the
variance is the minimum necessary to allow the construction or substantial
improvement, and that all due consideration has been given to use of methods
and materials that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.410 CONSIDERATIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF VARIANCES.
   In reviewing applications for variances; all technical evaluations, all
relevant factors; all other requirements of this chapter and the Building Code,
as applicable; and the following shall be considered:
   (A)   The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands
resulting in further injury or damage;
   (B)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   (C)   The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners;
   (D)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to
the community;
   (E)   The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development
that are not subject to flooding or erosion and the necessity of a waterfront
location, where applicable;
   (F)   The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and
anticipated development;
   (G)   The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
   (H)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
   (I)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and
sediment transport of the floodwater and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
   (J)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and
bridges.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.420 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF VARIANCES.
   Variances shall only be issued upon:
   (A)   Submission by the applicant of a showing of good and sufficient cause
that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration or topography of the
site limit compliance with any provision of this chapter or renders the
elevation standards of the Building Code inappropriate;
   (B)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that
render the lot undevelopable;
   (C)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public or future property owners, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances;
   (D)   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and
   (E)   When the request is to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new
building or substantial improvement of a building below the base flood
elevation, notification to the applicant in writing over the signature of the
Floodplain Administrator specifying the difference between the base flood
elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that issuance
of a variance to construct below the elevation required in the Building Code
will result in increased premium rates for federal flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage, and that such
construction below the required elevation increases risks to life and property.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
ARTICLE 108. VIOLATIONS
§ 8.79.430 VIOLATIONS.
   Any development in any flood hazard area that is being performed without an
issued permit or that is in conflict with an issued permit shall be deemed a
violation. A building or structure without the documentation of the elevation
of the lowest floor, other required design certifications or other evidence of
compliance required by this chapter or the Building Code is presumed to be a
violation until such time as required documentation is submitted. Violation of
the requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.440 AUTHORITY.
   The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or
stop work orders to owners of property involved, to the owner’s agent or to the
person or persons doing the work for development that is not within the scope
of the Building Codes, but is regulated by this chapter and that is determined
to be a violation.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.450 UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE.
   Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a
notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall
be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Penalties, fines and remediation
fees will be determined by Public Works Department on a case-by-case basis.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
PART II. DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE 201. DEFINITIONS
§ 8.79.460 GENERAL.
   The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have
the meanings shown herein. Where terms are not defined in this chapter and are
defined in the Building Code (CCR Title 24, Part 2) and used in the Residential
Code (CCR Title 24, Part 2.5), such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in those codes. Where terms are not defined in this chapter or the
Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the
context implies.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.470 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure on the same parcel of property as a
principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. For floodplain management purposes, the term includes only
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES used for parking and storage.
   ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change
in channel alignment, channelization or change in cross-sectional area of the
channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may
alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine
flow of water during conditions of the base flood.
   ASCE 24. The standard Flood Resistant Design and Construction, referenced by
the Building Code, developed and published by the American Society of Civil
Engineers, Reston, VA. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the
standard that is referenced by the Building Code.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. (Also defined in CCR Title 24, Part 2.)
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the base flood, including wave
height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (“NGVD”), North
American Vertical Datum (“NAVD”) or other datum specified on the flood
insurance rate map (“FIRM”). (Also defined in CCR Title 24, Part 2.)
   BASEMENT. For the purpose of floodplain management, the portion of a
building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. (Also
defined in CCR Title 24 Part 2.)
   BUILDING CODE. California Code of Regulations Title 24, the California
Building Standards Code, the family of building codes specifically adopted by
the State of California and composed of:
      (1)   Part 2, applicable to buildings and structures other than dwellings
within the scope of this part;
      (2)   Part 2.5, applicable to one- and two-family dwellings and
townhouses not more than three stories, and accessory structures;
      (3)   Part 10, applicable to existing buildings (as defined in that
code); and
      (4)   Other specified codes.
   DESIGN FLOOD. The flood associated with the greater of the following two
areas: (Also defined in CCR Title 24, Part 2.)
      (1)   Area with a floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of
flooding in any year; and
      (2)   Area designated as a flood hazard area on a community’s flood
hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.
   DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the “design flood,” including wave
height, relative to the datum specified on the community’s legally designated
flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION
shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building’s
perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In
areas designated as Zone AO where a depth number is not specified on the map,
the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet (610 mm). (Also
defined in CCR Title 24, Part 2.)
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, temporary
structures, temporary or permanent storage of materials, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations, flood control
projects and other land-disturbing activities.
   ENCROACHMENT. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent
structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas.
   EXCEPTIONAL HARDSHIP. For the purpose of variances from this chapter or the
Building Code, the exceptional difficulty that would result from a failure to
grant a requested variance. Mere economic or financial hardship is not
EXCEPTIONAL. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps,
personal preferences or the disapproval of one’s neighbors do not, as a rule,
qualify as EXCEPTIONAL HARDSHIPS. All of these circumstances can be resolved
through other means without granting variances, even when the alternatives are
more expensive or require the property owner to build elsewhere or put the
parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before July 16, 1979.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source; and
      (3)   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by
flooding.
   FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A dam or barrier design and constructed to keep water
away from or out of a specified area, including, but not limited to, levees,
floodwalls and channelization.
   FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS. Any construction material capable of
withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining
any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. (Also defined in CCR Title
24, Part 2.)
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The greater of the following two areas: (Also defined in
CCR Title 24, Part 2.)
      (1)   The area within a floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of
flooding in any year; and
      (2)   The area designated as a FLOOD HAZARD AREA on the community’s flood
hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (“FIRM”). An official map of a community on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (“FEMA”) has delineated both the
special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community. (Also defined in CCR Title 24, Part 2.)
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency containing the flood insurance rate map (“FIRM”), the flood
boundary and floodway map (“FBFM”), the water surface elevation of the base
flood and supporting technical data. (Also defined in CCR Title 24, Part 2.)
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The community official designated by title to
administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of the river, creek or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height. (Also defined in CCR Title 24, Part 2.)
   FRAUD or VICTIMIZATION. For the purpose of variances from this chapter or
the Building Code, the intentional use of deceit to deprive another of rights
or property, making a victim of the deprived person or the public. As it
pertains to buildings granted variances to be constructed below the elevation
required by the Building Code, future owners or tenants of such buildings and
the community as a whole may bear the burden of increased risk of damage from
floods, increased cost of flood insurance and increased recovery costs,
inconvenience, danger and suffering.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use that cannot perform its intended purpose,
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only
docking facilities, port facilities necessary for the loading or unloading of
cargo or passengers and shipbuilding or ship repair facilities. The term does
not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the inventory of historic places maintained
by the State Office of Historic Preservation; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by the
State Office of Historic Preservation.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (“LOMC”). An official determination issued by FEMA that
amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance
study. LETTERS OF MAP CHANGE include:
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (“LOMA”). An amendment based on technical
data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special
flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map
and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property or structure is
not located in a special flood hazard area;
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (“LOMR”). A revision based on technical data
that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard
area boundaries and floodway delineations and other planimetric features;
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (“LOMR-F”). A determination
that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base
flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood
hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have
been permitted and placed in accordance with the community’s floodplain
management regulations; and
      (4)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (“CLOMR”). A formal review and
comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project
complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to
delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the
effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission
and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may
be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM.
   LIGHT-DUTY TRUCK. As defined in 40 C.F.R. § 86.082-2, any motor vehicle
rated at 8,500 pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a
vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle
frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is:
      (1)   Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is
a derivation of such a vehicle;
      (2)   Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity
of more than 12 persons; or
      (3)   Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway
operation and use.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
non-elevation requirements of the Building Codes. (Also defined in CCR Title
24, Part 2.)
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure that is transportable in one or more
sections, built on a permanent chassis, designed for use as a single-family
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and constructed to the “Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards,” promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development. Also see definitions in Cal. Civil Code, § 798.3 and Cal. Health
and Safety Code, § 18007. For the purposes of floodplain management, the term
also includes mobile homes and recreational vehicles, park trailers, travel
trailers and similar transportable structures that are placed on a site for 180
consecutive days or longer.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The price at which a property will change hands between a
willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy
or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this
chapter, the term refers to the MARKET VALUE of buildings and structures,
excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. MARKET VALUE may be
established by one of the following methods:
      (1)   Actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality
of construction);
      (2)   Tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a
factor provided by the property appraiser; or
      (3)   A qualified independent appraiser.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed on or after July 16,
1979.
   NUISANCE. That which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community
or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs
the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or
river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
   PERMIT FOR FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT. An official document or certificate
issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which
authorizes performance of specified development activities that are located in
flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this chapter.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, 400
square feet (37.16 m2) or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-
duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. A
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE is ready for highway use when it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. Also see
definitions in Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 18010.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (“SFHA”). The land area subject to flood hazards
and shown on a flood insurance rate map or other flood hazard map as Zone A,
AE, A1-30, A99, AR, AO, AH, V, VO, VE or V1-30. (Also defined in CCR Title 24,
Part 2.)
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
(Also defined in CCR Title 24, Part 2.)
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
alteration, addition or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
improvement or repair is started. When the structure has sustained substantial
damage, any repairs are considered SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT, regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (Also
defined in CCR Title 24, Part 2.)
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing Health, Sanitary or Safety Code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions;
or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic
structure.
   UTILITY AND MISCELLANEOUS GROUP U. Buildings and structures of an accessory
character and miscellaneous structure not classified in any special occupancy,
as described in the Building Code.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific
enforcement would result in exceptional hardship.
   VIOLATION. A development that is not fully compliant with this chapter or
the flood provisions of the Building Code, as applicable.
   WATERCOURSE. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature
in, on, through or over which water flows at least periodically.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
PART III. FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE 301. BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
§ 8.79.480 REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   Applications for building and structures within the scope of the Building
Code that are proposed in flood hazard areas shall comply with the applicable
requirements of the Building Code.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.490 DETACHED GARAGES AND ACCESSORY STORAGE STRUCTURES.
   Detached garages and accessory storage structures used only for parking or
storage are permitted below the base flood elevation; provided the garages and
accessory storage structures:
   (A)   Are one story and not larger than 600 square feet in area when located
in special flood hazard areas;
   (B)   Are anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement
resulting from flood loads;
   (C)   Have flood openings in accordance with the Building Code;
   (D)   Have flood damage-resistant materials used below the base flood
elevation; and
   (E)   Have mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems, including plumbing
fixtures, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.500 UTILITY AND MISCELLANEOUS GROUP U.
   (A)   Utility and miscellaneous Group U includes buildings that are
accessory in character and miscellaneous structures not classified in any
specific occupancy in the Building Code, including, but not limited to,
agricultural buildings, aircraft hangars (accessory to a one- or two-family
residence), barns, carports, fences more than six feet (1,829 mm) high, grain
silos (accessory to a residential occupancy), greenhouses, livestock shelters,
private garages, retaining walls, sheds, stables and towers.
   (B)   In addition to the Building Code requirements for fire and life
safety, the following shall apply to utility and miscellaneous Group U
buildings and structures in flood hazard areas.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of such buildings and
structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
resulting from flood loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the design flood.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvement of such buildings and
structures, when fully enclosed by walls, shall be elevated such that the
lowest floor, including basement, is elevated to or above the design flood
elevation in accordance with ASCE 24 or shall be dry floodproofed in accordance
with ASCE 24.
      (3)   Unless dry floodproofed, fully enclosed areas below the design
flood elevation shall be constructed in accordance with ASCE 24 and limited to
parking, storage and building access.
      (4)   When fully enclosed by walls, flood openings shall be installed in
accordance with ASCE 24.
      (5)   Flood damage-resistant materials shall be used below the design
flood elevation.
      (6)   Mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems, including plumbing
fixtures, shall be located or installed in accordance with ASCE 24.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
ARTICLE 302. SUBDIVISIONS
§ 8.79.510 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   Subdivision proposals in flood hazard areas, including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that
the following apply.
   (A)   Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage
and will be reasonably safe from flooding.
   (B)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electric,
communications and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage in accordance with §§
8.79.520 and
8.79.530, as applicable, and appropriate codes.
   (C)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in
Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater
around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.520 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the requirements of §
8.79.510, where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the
following shall be required.
   (A)   The flood hazard area, including floodways, as appropriate, shall be
delineated on preliminary subdivision plats.
   (B)   Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five
acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood
elevations determined in accordance with §
8.79.270(A).
   (C)   When, as part of a proposed subdivision, fill will be placed to
support buildings, the fill shall be placed in accordance with the Building
Code and approval of the subdivision shall require submission of as-built
elevations for each filled pad certified by a licensed land surveyor or
registered civil engineer.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
ARTICLE 303. SITE IMPROVEMENTS, UTILITIES AND LIMITATIONS
§ 8.79.530 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   All proposed development in flood hazard areas shall be reviewed to
determine that the following apply.
   (A)   Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage
and will be reasonably safe from flooding.
   (B)   Where the proposed development has more than 50 lots or is larger than
five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base
flood elevations determined in accordance with §
8.79.270(A).
   (C)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electric,
communications and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
   (D)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in
Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater
around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.540 SANITARY SEWER FACILITIES.
   All new and replaced sanitary sewer facilities, private sewage treatment
plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems) and on-site waste
disposal systems shall be designed, in accordance with Chapter 7, ASCE 24, to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and
discharge from the facilities into floodwaters, and impairment of the
facilities and systems.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.550 WATER SUPPLY FACILITIES.
   All new and replaced water supply facilities shall be designed, in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 7, ASCE 24, to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.560 DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODWAYS.
   Development, site improvements and land disturbing activity involving fill
or regrading shall not be authorized in the floodway unless the floodway
encroachment analysis required in §
8.79.280(A) demonstrates the proposed work will not result in any increase in
the base flood level during occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.570 LIMITATIONS ON PLACEMENT OF FILL.
   Subject to the limitations of this chapter, fill shall be designed to be
stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of
floodwaters, prolonged inundation and protection against flood-related erosion
and scour. In addition to these requirements, when intended to support
buildings and structures, fill shall comply with the requirements of the
Building Code. The placement of fill intended to change base flood elevations,
change floodway boundaries or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on
FIRMs shall be subject to the requirements of §
8.79.290.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
ARTICLE 304. INSTALLATION OF MANUFACTURED HOMES
§ 8.79.580 INSTALLATION.
   All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by
an installer that is licensed pursuant to the California Business and
Professions Code and shall comply with the requirements of the Department of
Housing and Community Development (“HCD”) and the requirements of this chapter.
In addition to permits pursuant to this chapter, permits from the HCD are
required where the HCD is the enforcement agency for installation of
manufactured homes. Upon completion of installation and prior to the final
inspection by the Floodplain Administrator, the installer shall submit
certification of the elevation of the manufactured home, prepared by a licensed
land surveyor or registered civil engineer, to the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.590 FOUNDATIONS.
   All new and replacement manufactured homes, including substantial
improvement of manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be
installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance
with the foundation requirements of § R322.2 of the Residential Code (CCR Title
24, Part 2.5) and this chapter. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to §
8.79.620 are permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of
at least equivalent strength.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.600 ANCHORING.
   All new and replacement manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved in a flood hazard area shall be installed using methods and practices
which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring are authorized to include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind loads
and seismic loads.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.610 GENERAL ELEVATION REQUIREMENT.
   Unless subject to the requirements of §
8.79.620, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced or substantially
improved on sites located:
   (A)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
   (B)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
   (C)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision;
or
   (D)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a
manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood,
shall be elevated such that the lowest floor, or bottom of the lowest
horizontal member of the lowest floor, as applicable to the flood hazard area,
is at or above the base flood elevation.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.620 ELEVATION REQUIREMENT FOR CERTAIN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
AND SUBDIVISIONS.
   Manufactured homes that are not subject to §
8.79.610, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced or
substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as a result of
flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the:
   (A)   Lowest floor, or bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member, as
applicable to the flood hazard area, is at or above the base flood elevation;
or
   (B)   Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36
inches in height above grade.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.630 FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS.
   Materials below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the flood
damage-resistant materials requirements of § R322 of the Residential Code (CCR
Title 24, Part 2.5).
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.640 ENCLOSURES.
   Fully enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the
enclosed area requirements of § R322 of the Residential Code (CCR Title 24,
Part 2.5).
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.650 PROTECTION OF MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT AND OUTSIDE APPLIANCES.
   (A)   Requirement. Mechanical equipment and outside appliances shall be
elevated to or above the lowest floor or bottom of the lowest horizontal
structural member of the manufactured home, as applicable to the flood hazard
area.
   (B)   Exception. Where such equipment and appliances are designed and
installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within their
components and the systems are constructed to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the
occurrence of flooding up to the elevation required by §§
8.79.610 or 8.79.620, as applicable, the systems and equipment shall be
permitted to be located below that elevation. Electrical wiring systems shall
be permitted below the design flood elevation provided they conform to the
provisions of NFPA 70 (National Electric Code).
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
ARTICLE 305. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
§ 8.79.660 TEMPORARY PLACEMENT.
   Recreational vehicles in flood hazard areas shall be placed on a site for
less than 180 consecutive days or shall be fully licensed and ready for highway
use. READY FOR HIGHWAY USE means the recreational vehicle is on wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices and has no permanently attached additions, such as rooms,
stairs, decks and porches.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.670 PERMANENT PLACEMENT.
   Recreational vehicles that do not meet the limitations in §
8.79.060 for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of Article 304 for
manufactured homes.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
ARTICLE 306. OTHER DEVELOPMENT
§ 8.79.680 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR OTHER DEVELOPMENT.
   All development, including human-made changes to improved or unimproved real
estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this chapter or the
Building Code, shall:
   (A)   Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
   (B)   Meet the limitations of §
8.79.560 when located in a regulated floodway;
   (C)   Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the design flood;
   (D)   Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and
   (E)   Have mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems above the design
flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum
electric service required to address Life, Safety and Electric Code
requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms
to the provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code for wet
locations.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
 
§ 8.79.690 TANKS.
   Tanks that serve buildings shall comply with the requirements of the
Building Code. Underground and aboveground tanks that serve other purposes
shall be designed, constructed, installed and anchored in accordance with ASCE
24.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.700 REQUIREMENTS FOR TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND TEMPORARY STORAGE IN FLOOD
HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   Temporary structures shall be erected for a period of less than 180
days and temporary storage of goods and materials shall be permitted for a
period of less than 180 days. Extensions may be granted in accordance with §
8.79.230.
   (B)   In addition, the following apply:
      (1)   Temporary structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. Fully enclosed
temporary structures shall have flood openings that are in accordance with ASCE
24 to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters;
      (2)   Temporary stored materials shall not include hazardous materials;
and
      (3)   The requirements of §
8.79.560, when located in floodways.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.710 FENCES IN FLOODWAYS.
   Fences in floodways that have the potential to block the passage of
floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the
limitations of §
8.79.560.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.720 OIL DERRICKS.
   Oil derricks located in flood hazard areas shall be designed in conformance
with flood loads required by the Building Code.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.730 RETAINING WALLS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS IN FLOODWAYS.
   Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve placement of fill
in floodways shall meet the limitations of §
8.79.560 and the requirements for site grading in Chapter 18 of the Building
Code.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.740 ROADS AND WATERCOURSE CROSSINGS IN FLOODWAYS.
   Roads and watercourse crossings that encroach into floodways or riverine
waterways with base flood elevations where floodways have not been designated,
including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for
vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other
side shall meet the limitations of §
8.79.560. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of work proposed for a road
or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of §
8.79.280(C).
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.750 SWIMMING POOLS.
   Above-ground swimming pools, on-ground swimming pools and in-ground swimming
pools that involve placement of fill in floodways shall meet the requirement of
§
8.79.560.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
ARTICLE 307. FLOOD CONTROL PROJECTS
§ 8.79.760 FLOOD CONTROL PROJECTS; GENERAL.
   In addition to applicable federal, state and other local permits, a permit
for floodplain development is required for construction of flood control
projects. The purpose for the permit is to examine the impact on flood hazard
areas, floodways and base flood elevations shown on the FIRM. Unless otherwise
authorized by separate regulations, issuance of this permit does not address
the sufficiency of the structural elements of the proposed flood control
project. Permits for floodplain development and building permits in areas
affected by proposed flood control projects shall not be issued based on
conditional letters of map revision issued by FEMA.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
§ 8.79.770 FLOOD CONTROL PROJECTS; APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for permits for flood control projects shall include
documentation, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Site plan or document showing the existing topography and the
boundaries of the flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and base flood
elevations shown on the FIRM;
   (B)   Site plan or document showing the proposed topography and the proposed
changes to the boundaries of the flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and
base flood elevations; and
   (C)   The documentation submitted to FEMA for a conditional letter of map
revision (“CLOMR”) and, if issued, the conditional letter of map revision.
Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant. A CLOMR is required when a proposed flood control project alters a
floodway and increases base flood elevations more than greater than 0.00 feet,
or alters a watercourse a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood
elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and
floodways have not been designated and increases base flood elevations more
than 1.0 foot.
(Ord. MC-1622, passed 1-17-2024)
CHAPTER 8.80: STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Section
Article 1. Authority, Purpose and Policy; Definitions
   
8.80.101   Authority
   
8.80.102   Purpose and objectives
   
8.80.103   Definitions
Article 2. General Conditions and Prohibitions
   
8.80.201   Administration
   
8.80.202   Applicability
   
8.80.203   Notice
   
8.80.204   Connections
   
8.80.205   Protection of the storm water drainage system
   
8.80.206   Prohibited discharges
   
8.80.207   Exceptions to the prohibited discharges
   
8.80.208   Compliance with best management practices (“BMPs”)
   
8.80.209   Treatment of storm water runoff
   
8.80.210   Affirmative defense
   
8.80.211   Spill containment
   
8.80.212   Immediate notification of accidental discharge
   
8.80.213   Written notification of accidental discharge
   
8.80.214   Authority to inspect
Article 3. Residential Requirements
   
8.80.301   Prohibited discharges
   
8.80.302   Responsibility for illegal discharge of prohibited substances
   
8.80.303   Maintenance of private residential storm drainage systems
Article 4. Industrial and Commercial Requirements
   
8.80.401   Non-storm water discharges
   
8.80.402   General permit for storm water discharges from industrial activities
   
8.80.403   Conditional category - notice of non-applicability
   
8.80.404   Best management practices (“BMPs”)
Article 5. Construction Requirements
   
8.80.501   Storm water quality management plan (“SWQMP”)
   
8.80.502   General permit for storm water discharges from construction activity
   
8.80.503   Non-storm water discharges
   
8.80.504   Non-storm water discharge reporting requirements
   
8.80.505   Best management practices
Article 6. Administrative Enforcement Remedies
   
8.80.601   Notice of correction
   
8.80.602   Notice of violation
   
8.80.603   Administrative orders
   
8.80.604   Administrative hearing
   
8.80.605   Administrative civil penalties
   
8.80.606   Compensation for damages
   
8.80.607   Appeals
   
8.80.608   Violations deemed a public nuisance
Article 7. Judicial Enforcement Remedies
   
8.80.701   Legal action
   
8.80.702   Civil penalties
   
8.80.703   Criminal prosecution
   
8.80.704   Falsifying information
Article 8. General Clauses
   
8.80.801   Severability
   
8.80.802   City’s right of revision
ARTICLE 1. AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND POLICY; DEFINITIONS
§ 8.80.101 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by an areawide urban
storm water runoff permit (NPDES Permit No. CAS618036, Order No. R8-2002-0012)
issued by the State Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region
pursuant to § 402(p) of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342(p).
§ 8.80.102 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the city by prescribing regulations to effectively
prohibit non-storm water discharges into the city’s storm water drainage system
and to specifically achieve the following objectives:
   (A)   Control discharges from spills, dumping or disposal of materials other
than storm water;
   (B)   Reduce the discharge of pollutants in all storm water discharges to
the maximum extent practicable;
   (C)   Protect and enhance the water quality of local, state and federal
watercourses, water bodies, ground water and wetlands in a manner pursuant to
and consistent with the Clean Water Act;
   (D)   Establish penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter;
and
   (E)   Provide for the equitable distribution of the cost of the storm water
drainage system and storm water pollution abatement programs, and all related
services through the establishment of fair and equitable fees and charges.
§ 8.80.103 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The
definitions in this chapter are included for reference purposes and are not
intended to narrow the scope of the definitions set forth in federal or state
law or regulations. Words used in this chapter in the singular may include the
plural and the plural may include the singular. Use of masculine shall also
mean feminine and neuter.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   ADJUSTMENT. A determination that the volumetric amount of storm water which
enters the storm water drainage system from a premises is deemed to be a
defined amount substantially different from the average storm water drainage.
   AREAWIDE URBAN STORM WATER RUNOFF PERMIT. The current, regional NPDES permit
issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana
Region, to the San Bernardino County Flood Control District, San Bernardino
County and 16 incorporated cities discharging storm water into the Upper Santa
Ana River Basin for the regulation of storm water discharges from municipal
separate storm sewer systems.
   AVERAGE STORM WATER DRAINAGE. The average amount of storm water drainage
which enters the storm water drainage system from a premises, based on runoff
factors established by the San Bernardino County Flood Control District.
   BMP. Any best management practice, best management guideline or best
management requirement as adopted by any federal, state, regional or local
agency to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs
also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to
control: plant site runoff, spillage or leaks; sludge or waste storage and
disposal; or drainage from raw material or chemical storage.
   CITY or THE CITY. Refers to the City of San Bernardino, California.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer for the City of San Bernardino, or the City
Engineer’s designee.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Any activity used in the process of developing,
redeveloping, enhancing or maintaining land, including, but not limited to:
land disturbance, building construction, paving and surfacing, storage and
disposal of construction related materials.
   CONTAMINATION. As defined in the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act,
being Cal. Water Code, Division 7, and § 13050(k), CONTAMINATION is “an
impairment of the quality of waters of the state by waste to a degree which
creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread
of disease. CONTAMINATION includes any equivalent effect resulting from the
disposal of waste whether or not waters of the state are affected.”
   COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE. The time period allowed by the city for a discharger to
achieve compliance with the city’s storm water regulations. The COMPLIANCE
SCHEDULE shall contain specific dates by which adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related equipment and/or procedures must be installed or
implemented.
   DEVELOPED PARCEL. Any lot or parcel of land altered from its natural state
by the construction, creation and addition of impervious area, except public
streets or highways.
   DEVELOPER. A person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who
proposes to develop, develops or causes to be developed real property for
himself or herself or for others except that employees and consultants of such
persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not developers.
   DEWATERING. The removal and disposal of surface water or ground water for
purposes of preparing a site for construction.
   DISCHARGE. Any release, spill, leak, flow or escape of any liquid, including
sewage, wastewater or storm water, semi-solid or solid substance onto the land
or into the city’s storm water drainage system.
   DISCHARGER. Any person, property owner or occupant of a unit, building,
premises or lot in the city who discharges, or causes to be discharged, any of
the substances listed in the definition for DISCHARGE directly or indirectly
into the city’s storm water drainage system.
   EPA. The Environmental Protection Agency of the United States of America.
   GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORM WATER DISCHARGES FROM CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. A
statewide general NPDES permit that regulates all storm water discharges
associated with construction projects that disturb one acre or more of land or
which result in the disturbance of less than one acre, but which are part of a
larger common plan of development or sale.
   GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORM WATER DISCHARGES FROM INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES. A
statewide general NPDES permit that regulates storm water discharges associated
with industrial activities that are listed in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   HEARING OFFICER. The City’s Engineer, or his or her designee, who presides
at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter and issues final
decisions on matters raised therein.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any discharge (or seepage) into the city’s storm water
drainage system that is not composed entirely of storm water except for the
authorized discharges listed in §
8.80.207. ILLEGAL DISCHARGES include the improper disposal of wastes into the
storm water drainage system.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION. Defined as either of the following:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm water drainage system,
including, but not limited to, any conveyance which allows non-storm water
discharges including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the
storm water drainage system and any connections to the storm water drainage
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by a government
agency; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected to the storm water drainage
system that is not permitted pursuant to a valid NPDES permit or which has not
been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records approved by the city.
   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (“MEP”). Refers to the maximum level of pollutant
reductions or storm water runoff reductions that must be achieved by treatment,
infiltration or a combination of treatment, infiltration and best management
practices, taking into account equitable considerations of synergistic,
additive and competing factors, including, but not limited to, gravity of the
problem, fiscal and technical feasibility, public health risks, societal
concern and social benefits, to effectively limit the discharge of pollutants
or storm water runoff into the city’s storm water drainage system.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (“NPDES”). The EPA’s
national program under the Act to eliminate discharges of pollution into waters
of the United States.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. Land disturbing activities; structural development,
including construction or installation of a building or structure; creation of
impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.
   NON-STORM WATER. Any water discharging to the city’s storm water drainage
system that does not originate from precipitation events.
   NON-STRUCTURAL BMPS. Any schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, managerial practices or operational practices that aim
to prevent storm water pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at
the source of pollution.
   NOTICE OF INTENT (“NOI”). A form provided by the State Water Resources
Control Board that is required to be completed and submitted in order to obtain
coverage under one of the state’s NPDES general storm water permits prior to
the start of certain business activities or construction activities.
   NPDES PERMIT. Any permit issued pursuant to the Act.
   NUISANCE. Any condition described by all of the following:
      (1)   Is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses,
or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property;
      (2)   Affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or
any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or
damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal; and
      (3)   Occurs during, or as a result of, the treatment or disposal of
wastes.
   PERMIT. Any permit issued by the city.
   PERMITTEE. The San Bernardino County Flood Control District, San Bernardino
County and each of the 16 cities in San Bernardino County discharging storm
water drainage into the Upper Santa Ana River Basin and regulated by the
areawide urban storm water runoff permit.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, committee, entity, association,
corporation, public agency and any other organization, or group of persons,
public or private; the masculine genders shall include the feminine; the
singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
   pH. The measure of the hydrogen ion concentration of water and the standard
by which the acidity or alkalinity of a water sample is determined.
   POLLUTANT. Shall mean, but not be limited to, any liquid, solid or semi-
solid substances or combination thereof, which causes a nuisance or contributes
to a condition of contamination or pollution of the city’s storm water runoff,
storm water drainage system or the impairment or degradation of waters of the
state, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Floatable materials (such as floatable plastics or wood products,
and metal shavings, or materials forming films, foam or scum);
      (2)   Household waste (such as trash, cleaners, toxic or hazardous
chemicals, yard wastes, animal fecal materials, used oil, coolant, gasoline and
other vehicle fluids);
      (3)   Metals and non-metals, including compounds of metals and non-
metals;
      (4)   Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants,
waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease);
      (5)   Domestic sewage from sewer line overflows, septic tanks, port-a-
potties, boats and recreational vehicles;
      (6)   Animal wastes (such as wastes from confinement facilities, kennels,
pens, stables and show facilities);
      (7)   Substances having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.5, or
unusual coloration, turbidity or odor;
      (8)   Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen demand,
chemical oxygen demand or total organic carbon;
      (9)   Materials containing base/neutral or acid extractable organic
compounds;
      (10)   Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction sites
from construction activities (such as painting and staining; use of sealants
and glues; use of lime; use of wood preservatives and solvents; disturbance of
asbestos fibers, paint flakes or stucco fragments; application of oils,
lubricants, vehicle maintenance, construction equipment washing, concrete
pouring and cleanup; use of concrete detergents; steam cleaning or sand
blasting; use of chemical degreasing or diluting agents; and chlorinated water
from potable line flushing;
      (11)   Those pollutants defined in § 1362(6) of the Act; and
      (12)   Any other constituent or material, including, but not limited to,
pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, eroded soils, sediment and particulate
materials, in quantities that have been determined by the state or EPA to
adversely affect the beneficial uses of waters of the state.
   REDEVELOPMENT. The creation or addition of impervious surfaces or the making
of improvements to an existing structure on an already developed site;
replacement of impervious surfaces that are not part of a routine maintenance
activity; and land disturbing activities related with structural or impervious
surfaces.
   SEWAGE. The wastewater of the community derived from residential,
agricultural, commercial or industrial sources, including domestic sewage and
industrial wastewater.
   SIC (“STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION”). The statistical classification
standard underlying all establishment-based federal economic statistics
classified by industry. The Standard is published in the SIC Manual, 1987,
Office of Management and Budget.
   STORM WATER. Rain water, snow melt runoff and associated surface runoff and
drainage.
   STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All of the property involved in the operation
of the storm water drainage collection and disposal system for the city,
including, but not limited to, conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels
and watercourses, together with appurtenances, pumping stations and equipment
which is tributary to the regional storm water runoff system.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (“SWPPP”). The plan as described in
the general construction activity storm water permit as issued by the State
Water Resources Control Board on August 19, 1999 and as may be amended, or the
general industrial activities storm water permit as issued on April 17, 1997
and as may be amended, which specifies BMPs that will prevent pollutants from
contacting storm water and all products of erosion from moving off site into
receiving waters.
   STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (“SWQMP”). A plan required of new
development/redevelopment projects, outlining appropriate non-structural and
structural BMPs, including storm water infiltration and treatment devices that
will be implemented and installed to prevent pollutants from being discharged
into the city’s storm water drainage system, during and after construction.
   STRUCTURAL BMPS. Any structural facility designed and constructed to remove
pollutants from storm water runoff or prevent pollutants from contacting storm
water. Examples are canopies, structural enclosures, sediment basins, catch
basin inlet filters, grassy swales and sand and oil interceptors.
   VIOLATION. A breech of any provision of this chapter.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. Any surface water or ground water, including saline
waters, within the boundaries of the state.
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PROHIBITIONS
§ 8.80.201 ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Engineer shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the City Engineer
may be delegated by the City Engineer to persons authorized by the City
Engineer and in the employ of the city.
§ 8.80.202 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all dischargers, including all residents as well
as commercial, industrial and construction enterprises, to the city’s storm
water drainage system, and to dischargers outside the city who, by agreement
with the city, utilize the city’s storm water drainage system.
§ 8.80.203 NOTICE.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, any notice required by this chapter shall
be in writing and served in person, by first class, registered or certified
mail. Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the time of deposit, postage
prepaid, in a facility regularly serviced by the United States Postal Service.
§ 8.80.204 CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The discharge or diversion of storm water or non-storm water is
permissible when the connection to the city’s storm water drainage system is
made in accordance with a valid construction permit, approved construction plan
and, if applicable, an NPDES storm water permit and the discharge is not
prohibited under §
8.80.206.
   (B)   (1)   It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain and/or continue any
illicit connection to the city’s storm water drainage system. This prohibition
is retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of
whether the connection was made under a permit or other authorization or
whether the connection was permissible under the law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of the connection.
      (2)   Construction permits are required for the construction or
modification of any storm drain or conveyor of drainage waters and appurtenant
items within:
         (a)   Dedicated easements, rights-of-way or public place and/or
facility; or
         (b)   Private property so as it may, directly or indirectly, discharge
into the city’s storm water drainage system. Indirect discharges include, but
are not limited to, under sidewalk drains, driveway approaches and unrestricted
sheet flow.
§ 8.80.205 PROTECTION OF THE STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   Without the prior written approval of the City Engineer, no person shall
construct, modify or cause to be constructed or modified any structure,
facility or appurtenant items which may alter the normal functioning of the
city’s storm water drainage system, including any action which may alter the
capacity, fall or structural integrity of a storm drain, channel or related
structures.
§ 8.80.206 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   It is prohibited to:
   (A)   Discharge non-storm water, directly or indirectly, to the city’s storm
water drainage system, or any street, lined or unlined drainage channel which
leads to the city’s storm drain or directly or indirectly into any waters of
the state unless such discharge is authorized by either a separate NPDES permit
or as otherwise specified in §
8.80.207. If such discharge is permitted by a NPDES permit or is generally
exempted, but causes the city to violate any portion of its NPDES permits for
storm water discharges, such discharge is also prohibited;
   (B)   Discharge storm water into the city’s storm water drainage system
containing pollutants that have not been reduced to the maximum extent
practicable;
   (C)   Throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown,
deposited, placed, left or maintained any refuse, garbage, sediment or other
discarded or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations in or upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other
drainage structures, business place or upon any public or private lot of land
in the city, so that the same may be and/or may become a pollutant;
   (D)   Throw or deposit any refuse, garbage or any other pollutant into any
fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere
within the city; and
   (E)   Discharge any of the following types of waste into the city’s storm
water drainage system:
      (1)   Sewage;
      (2)   Surface cleaning wash water resulting from mopping, rinsing,
pressure washing or steam cleaning of gas stations and vehicle service
businesses or any other business;
      (3)   Discharges resulting from the cleaning, repair or maintenance of
any type of equipment, machinery or facility, including motor vehicles,
concrete mixing equipment, portable toilet servicing and the like;
      (4)   Wash water from mobile auto detailing and washing, steam and
pressure cleaning, carpet cleaning, drapery and furniture cleaning and the
like;
      (5)   Wastewater from cleaning municipal, industrial, commercial and
residential areas (including parking lots), streets, sidewalks, driveways,
patios, plazas, work yards and outdoor eating or drinking areas, containing
chemicals or detergents and without prior sweeping and the like;
      (6)   Storm water runoff from material or waste storage areas containing
chemicals, fuels, grease, oil or other hazardous materials or contaminated
equipment;
      (7)   Discharges from pool or fountain water containing chlorine,
biocides, acids or other chemicals; pool filter backwash containing debris and
chlorine;
      (8)   Pet waste, yard waste, debris, sediment and the like;
      (9)   Restaurant wastes, such as grease, mop water and wash water from
cleaning dishes, utensils, laundry, floors, floor mats, trash bins, grease
containers, food waste and the like;
      (10)   Chemicals or chemical waste;
      (11)   Medical wastes;
      (12)   Blow down or bleed water from cooling towers and boilers,
regenerative brine waste from water softeners or reverse osmosis treatment
systems;
      (13)   Materials or chemical substances that cause damage to the city’s
storm water drainage system; and
      (14)   Any other material that causes or contributes to a condition of
contamination, nuisance or pollution in the city’s storm drainage system or
causes a violation of any waste disposal regulations, waste discharge
requirements, water quality standards or objectives adopted by the State Water
Resources Control Board, Regional Water Quality Control Board, EPA, San
Bernardino County Fire Hazmat, San Bernardino County Flood Control District or
any other public agency with jurisdiction.
§ 8.80.207 EXCEPTIONS TO THE PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   The following discharges of non-storm water into the city’s storm
drainage system are generally exempt from the prohibited discharges listed in §
8.80.206. However, divisions (A)(12) through (A)(22) below have been identified
as potential significant sources of pollutants and require coverage under the
regional board’s de minimus permit as well as prior approval by the City
Engineer before discharge (see *note below):
      (1)   Discharges covered by NPDES permits or written clearances issued by
the Regional or State Board;
      (2)   Landscape irrigation, lawn watering and irrigation water;
      (3)   Water from crawl space pumps;
      (4)   Air conditioning condensation;
      (5)   Non-commercial car washing;
      (6)   Rising ground waters and natural springs;
      (7)   Ground water infiltration, as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 35.2005(b)
(20), and uncontaminated pumped ground water;
      (8)   Water flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
      (9)   Water flows generated from emergency response and/or firefighting
activities; however, appropriate BMPs shall be implemented to the extent
practicable; BMPs must be implemented to reduce pollutants from non-emergency
firefighting flow;
      (10)   Waters not otherwise containing wastes, as defined in Cal. Water
Code, § 13050(d);
      (11)   Other types of discharges identified and recommended by the city
and approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board;
      (12)   *Potable water line testing or flushing and other discharges from
potable water sources;
      (13)   *Water from fire hydrant testing and flushing using appropriate
BMPs;
      (14)   *Water from passive foundation drains or passive footing drains;
      (15)   *Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
      (16)   *Diverted stream flow;
      (17)   *Wastes associated with well installation, development, test
pumping and purging;
      (18)   *Aquifer testing wastes;
      (19)   *Discharges from hydrostatic testing of vessels, pipelines, tanks
and the like;
      (20)   *Discharges from the maintenance of potable water supply
pipelines, tanks, reservoirs and the like;
      (21)   *Discharges from the disinfection of potable water supply
pipelines, tanks, reservoirs and the like; and
      (22)   *Discharges from potable water supply systems resulting from
system failures, pressure releases and the like.
      *Note: The city requires that a “non-storm water discharge notification
form” be submitted to the Development Services Department for approval of these
discharges, five days prior to any planned discharges or, as soon as possible,
for any unplanned discharges. The notification form is available from the
Development Services Department counter. Monitoring may also be required for
these discharges.
   (B)   The Regional Board may issue waste discharge requirements for
discharges exempted from NPDES requirements, if identified to be a significant
source of pollutants. The Executive Officer of the Board may also add
categories of non-storm water discharges that are not significant sources of
pollutants or remove categories of non-storm water discharges listed above
based upon a finding that the discharges are a significant source of
pollutants. In this case, the list of exempted discharges above would be
adjusted accordingly.
§ 8.80.208 COMPLIANCE WITH BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (“BMPs”).
   Any person undertaking any activity or operation in the city that could
potentially cause or contribute to storm water pollution or a discharge of non-
storm water shall comply with all applicable best management practices (“BMPs”)
as listed in the “California Storm Water Best Management Practice Handbooks” or
the current county storm water program’s “Report of Waste Discharge” to reduce
pollutants in storm water runoff and reduce non-storm water discharges to the
city’s storm water drainage system to the maximum extent practicable or to the
extent required by law.
§ 8.80.209 TREATMENT OF STORM WATER RUNOFF.
   If a discharger has the potential to introduce pollutants into the city’s
storm water drainage system or is exceeding EPA parameter benchmark values, the
city may require the installation of appropriate storm water treatment
equipment or devices. These devices shall reduce pollutant constituents to the
degree of reduction attainable through the application of the best management
practices to the maximum extent practicable. Any required treatment equipment
or devices shall be provided, operated and maintained at the expense of the
discharger. Detailed plans showing the treatment device and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable
to the city before construction or installation of the equipment. The review
and approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the
discharger from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to
treat storm water runoff or prevent the introduction of storm water pollutants
to comply with this chapter.
§ 8.80.210 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
   A discharger shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against
it alleging a violation of §
8.80.206 where the discharger can demonstrate it did not know or have reason to
know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges
from other sources, would cause violation of this chapter or the areawide urban
storm water runoff permit.
§ 8.80.211 SPILL CONTAINMENT.
   (A)   Persons storing chemicals or chemical waste outdoors shall be required
to install spill containment subject to requirements established by the City
Engineer and federal, state and county standards. Persons storing any other
materials or equipment that are potential sources of storm water pollution are
also required to install spill containment.
   (B)   No person shall operate a spill containment system that could allow
incompatible materials and/or wastes to mix, thereby creating hazardous or
toxic substances in the event of failure of one or more containers. Spill
containment systems shall consist of a system of dikes, walls, barriers, berms
and/or other devices designed to contain the spillage of the liquid contents of
the containers stored in them and to minimize the buildup of storm water from
precipitation, and run-on from roof drainage and outside areas. If the spill
containment system does not have a roof which covers the entire contained area,
the spill containment system shall have the capacity to contain precipitation
from at least a 24-hour, 25-year rainfall event, plus 10% of the total volume
of the material stored there or the volume of the largest container, whichever
is greater. Spill containment systems shall also be constructed of impermeable
and non-reactive materials to the materials and/or wastes being contained.
Spilled and/or leaked materials and/or wastes and any accumulated precipitation
shall be removed from the spill containment system in as timely a manner as is
necessary to prevent the overflow of the spill containment system.
   (C)   Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, all chemicals or
wastes discharged within the spill containment system shall be disposed of in
accordance with all applicable federal, state and local rules, regulations and
laws, and shall not be discharged into the city’s sanitary sewer system, storm
water drainage system or onto the ground.
§ 8.80.212 IMMEDIATE NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.
   (A)   Protection of the city’s storm water drainage system from the
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or wastes is the responsibility of
the person or persons in charge of such material. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the City Engineer for review, and shall be approved by the City
Engineer prior to any construction. All new and existing dischargers shall
complete such a plan. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the discharger from the responsibility to modify
his or her facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   A notice shall be permanently posted in a prominent place advising
employees whom to contact in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers
shall ensure that all employees are advised of the emergency notification
procedures. In the event of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility
of the discharger to immediately telephone and notify the proper authorities.
   (C)   All discharges released into the city’s storm water drainage system,
including a street or gutter, shall be immediately reported to the City
Development Services Department and Fire Department. All discharges that pose a
threat to human health or the environment shall be reported to the Executive
Officer of the State Regional Water Quality Control Board within 24 hours by
telephone or e-mail and followed with a written report of the spill event
within five days. At minimum, all sewage spills over 1,000 gallons and all
reportable quantities of hazardous materials or hazardous waste shall be
reported within 24 hours.
§ 8.80.213 WRITTEN NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.
   Within five working days following an accidental discharge into the city’s
storm water drainage system, the person or persons in charge of the material
and/or waste which was accidentally discharged shall submit a written report to
the City Engineer. The report shall describe in detail the type and volume of
the material and/or waste and the cause of the discharge. The report shall also
describe, in detail, all corrective actions taken and measures to be taken to
prevent future occurrences. Such notification of the accidental discharge shall
not relieve the user of any fines or civil penalties incurred as a result of
the event or any other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other
applicable laws.
§ 8.80.214 AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   (A)   The City Engineer, or his or her designated representative, shall be
authorized, at any reasonable time, to enter the premises of any discharger to
the city’s storm water drainage system to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, and to:
      (1)   Conduct inspection, monitoring and/or other authorized duties to
enforce the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Review any records, reports, test results or other information
required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such review may include the
necessity to photograph, videotape or copy any applicable information; and
      (3)   Inspect any chemicals, materials, wastes, storage areas, storage
containers and waste generating processes, treatment facilities and discharge
locations. Such inspection may include the necessity to photograph or videotape
any applicable chemicals, materials, wastes, storage areas, storage containers,
waste generating processes, treatment facilities and discharge locations.
   (B)   The City Engineer, or his or her designated representative, shall
provide adequate identification when entering the premises of any discharger.
If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained, the City Engineer shall have
recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspection
of the premises.
   (C)   If the City Engineer has reasonable cause to believe that non-storm
water discharge conditions on or emanating from the premises are of a nature so
as to require immediate inspection to safeguard public health or safety, the
City Engineer shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect said
property and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and
make such inspection, regardless if said property is occupied or unoccupied and
regardless if formal permission to inspect said property has been obtained.
   (D)   Where a discharger has instituted security measures requiring proper
identification and clearance before entry onto the premises, the discharger
shall make all necessary arrangements with its security agents in order that,
upon presentation of such identification, the City Engineer, or his or her
designated representative(s), shall be permitted to enter the premises without
delay, for the purpose of performing his or her authorized duties. For
facilities which require special clearances to conduct inspections, it shall be
the responsibility of the discharger to obtain all necessary clearances on
behalf of the city so that the inspection is not impaired.
ARTICLE 3. RESIDENTIAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 8.80.301 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   In addition to the general prohibitions in §
8.80.206, it is prohibited to discharge any of the following to any street,
gutter, alley, sidewalk, storm drain inlet, catch basin, conduit or other
drainage structures, business place or upon any public or private lot of land
in the city, so that the same may be and/or may become a pollutant:
   (A)   Animal waste, soil, leaves, plant and tree cuttings, grass clippings,
weeds, dead trees, fertilizer, soil amendments or mulch and pesticides;
   (B)   Concrete or cement waste, brick and tile work wastes, plaster and
drywall tool cleanup water, waste paint or painting cleanup water, asphalt or
asphalt cleanup solvents or slurry from saw cutting concrete or asphalt and
other construction waste;
   (C)   Domestic sewage, including wastewater from sinks, washing machines,
dishwashers, toilets, campers, motorhomes or trailers;
   (D)   Chemicals, degreasers, bleach, steam cleaning or pressure washing
wastewater;
   (E)   Motor oil, antifreeze, gasoline, diesel, kerosene, solvents, battery
acid, brake fluid, transmission fluid, power steering fluid, engine cleaning
compounds, engine or parts cleaning wash water or rinse water and any other
vehicular fluids;
   (F)   Water softener brine waste, or any other wastewater from other
household water treatment systems;
   (G)   Wastewater from draining swimming pools, ponds or fountains which
contain chlorine biocides, acids or other chemicals, pool filter backwash
containing debris and chlorine;
   (H)   Discharges from acid cleaning of swimming pools, ponds or fountains or
filter cleaning from the same; and
   (I)   Any other material that causes or contributes to a condition of
contamination, nuisance or pollution in the city’s storm drainage system or
causes a violation of any waste disposal regulations, waste discharge
requirements, water quality standards or objectives adopted by the State Water
Resources Control Board or Regional Water Quality Control Board.
§ 8.80.302 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ILLEGAL DISCHARGE OF PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES.
   The property owner(s) of a lot or parcel from which an illegal discharge
originates shall be ultimately responsible for all abatement and cleanup costs
associated with the discharge, at his or her own expense, if the responsible
party cannot be located. Likewise, if the tenant of a multi-family residential
unit has discharged a prohibited material or waste into the city’s storm
drainage system or has caused the contamination of storm water runoff from the
property by his or her activities and the City Engineer cannot determine the
responsible party or residential unit responsible, the owner of the property
from which the discharge originated shall be responsible for the cleanup and
abatement costs to mitigate the condition. Additionally, a property owner shall
be responsible for all cleanup costs and damages to the city’s storm drainage
system from a contractor’s activities, if the contractor was hired by the owner
and cannot be located.
§ 8.80.303 MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS.
   All private residential storm drainage inlets, under-drains and gutters
shall be inspected annually and cleaned prior to the beginning of the rainy
season if there is evidence of one or more of the following conditions:
   (A)   The sediment/debris storage volume is 25% or more full;
   (B)   There is evidence of illegal discharge; and
   (C)   Accumulated sediment or debris impairs the hydraulic function of the
facility. Private streets shall also be swept and maintained as needed to
prevent sediment, gardening waste, trash, litter and other contaminants from
entering the city’s storm drainage system.
ARTICLE 4. INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 8.80.401 NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGES.
   All non-storm water discharges associated with industrial and commercial
activities that discharge into the city’s storm water drainage system are
prohibited except as permitted by an individual user’s NPDES storm water permit
or §
8.80.207.
§ 8.80.402 GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORM WATER DISCHARGES FROM INDUSTRIAL
ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   All businesses who own or operate facilities described in 40 C.F.R. §
122.26(b)(14)(i) through (b)(14)(xi) are required to obtain coverage under the
state’s general permit for discharges of storm water associated with industrial
activities, at least 14 days prior to the startup of business activities. All
listed businesses are required to submit a completed notice of intent (“NOI”)
form, site map and application fee to the State Water Resources Control Board
(“SWRCB”). The SWRCB also requires the listed businesses to prepare a storm
water pollution prevention plan (“SWPPP”), retain a copy of the SWPPP on site
and comply with all the requirements of the general permit. Copies of the NOI
form are available from the City Development Services Department.
   (B)   The city requires that all businesses that have filed an NOI for
coverage under the state’s general permit and have received a waste discharge
identification number (“WDID”) from the State Water Resources Control Board,
either mail, fax or hand deliver a copy of the WDID letter from the state to
the Development Services Department as proof of filing.
§ 8.80.403 CONDITIONAL CATEGORY - NOTICE OF NON-APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Businesses who own or operate facilities described in 40 C.F.R. §
122.26(b)(14)(xi) may prepare a “notice of non-applicability” in lieu of an NOI
if they can certify on this form provided by the State Water Resources Control
Board that there is no manufacturing process, material, equipment or product
storage outside in an area that is exposed to storm water runoff.
   (B)   The “notice of non-applicability” must document all of the following:
      (1)   All prohibited non-storm water discharges have been eliminated or
otherwise permitted;
      (2)   All significant materials related to industrial activity (including
waste materials) are not exposed to storm water or authorized non-storm water
discharges;
      (3)   All industrial activities and industrial equipment are not exposed
to storm water or authorized non-storm water discharges; and
      (4)   There is no exposure of storm water to significant materials
associated with industrial activity through other direct or indirect pathways
such as from industrial activities that generate dust and particulates.
   (C)   Businesses in this category are required to submit the notice of non-
applicability to the local office of the State Regional Water Quality Control
Board, Santa Ana Region, and are required to maintain the above documentation
on-site at all times. They are also required to re-evaluate and re-certify once
a year that the conditions above are continuously met. Copies of the “notice of
non-applicability” form are available from the City Development Services
Department.
§ 8.80.404 BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (“BMPs”).
   (A)   All businesses, regardless of permit status, shall implement all
applicable BMPs, as listed in the “California Storm Water Best Management
Practice Handbooks” or the current San Bernardino County Storm Water Program’s
“Report of Waste Discharge,” to reduce pollutants in storm water runoff and
reduce non-storm water discharges to the city’s storm water drainage system to
the maximum extent practicable. All structural controls shall also be
maintained to effectively prevent pollutants from contacting storm water or
remove pollutants from storm water runoff to the maximum extent practicable.
Maintenance records for structural and treatment devices, including waste
hauling receipts, shall be kept for a period of five years and made available
to the city’s inspector, upon request.
   (B)   If structural or treatment controls are not functioning as designed or
are not effective in reducing storm water pollutants or non-storm water
discharges to the maximum extent practicable, the city will require that the
control device be repaired, rebuilt or replaced.
ARTICLE 5. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
§ 8.80.501 STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (“SWQMP”).
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of any grading or building permit, all
qualifying land development/ redevelopment projects shall submit and have
approved a storm water quality management plan (“SWQMP”) to the City Engineer
on a form provided by the city. The SWQMP shall identify all BMPs that will be
incorporated into the project to control storm water and non-storm water
pollutants during and after construction and shall be revised as necessary
during the life of the project. The SWQMP submittal applies to construction
projects covered by the NPDES general construction permit as well as
construction projects less than one acre.
   (B)   Qualifying development/redevelopment projects include:
      (1)   Home subdivisions of ten units or more. This includes single-family
residences, multi-family residences, condominiums, apartments and the like;
      (2)   Commercial developments of 100,000 square feet or more. This
includes non-residential developments, such as hospitals, educational
institutions, recreational facilities, mini-malls, hotels, office buildings,
warehouses and light industrial facilities;
      (3)   Vehicle maintenance shops (SIC codes 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532 through
7534, 7536 through 7539);
      (4)   Food service businesses developing 5,000 square feet or more of
land area;
      (5)   All hillside developments on 10,000 square feet or more, which are
located on areas with known erosive soil conditions or where the natural slope
is 25% or more;
      (6)   Developments of 2,500 square feet of impervious surface or more
adjacent to (within 200 feet) or discharging directly into environmentally
sensitive areas such as areas designated in the ocean plan as areas of special
biological significance or water bodies listed on the list of impaired waters
at § 303(d) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1313(d);
      (7)   Parking lots of 5,000 square feet or more exposed to storm water.
PARKING LOT is defined as land area or facility for the temporary storage of
motor vehicles; and
      (8)   All redevelopment projects adding 5,000 square feet or more of
impervious surface on an already developed site. This includes additional
buildings and/or structures, extension of an already existing building
footprint and construction of parking lots and the like.
§ 8.80.502 GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORM WATER DISCHARGES FROM CONSTRUCTION
ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Any developer/owner engaging in construction activities which disturb
one acre or more of land shall apply for coverage under the general storm water
permit for construction activity with the State Water Resources Control Board
(“SWRCB”). Any developer/owner engaging in construction activities which
disturb less than one acre but are part of a larger common plan of development
or sale that is greater than one acre must also apply for coverage under the
general storm water permit for construction activity with the State Water
Resources Control Board (“SWRCB”). CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY includes, but is not
limited to: clearing, grading, demolition, excavation, construction of new
structures and reconstruction of existing facilities, involving removal and
replacement that results in soil disturbance. The owner of the land where the
construction activity is occurring is responsible for obtaining coverage under
the permit. Owners may obtain coverage under the general permit by completing a
“notice of intent” form (“NOI”) and mailing the form along with a vicinity map
and the appropriate fee to the office of the State Water Resources Control
Board. The NOI form and checklist of items to submit to the state is available
from the State Water Resources Control Board in Sacramento, California or from
the City Development Services Department. In addition, the owner shall also
prepare a storm water pollution prevention plan (“SWPPP”) in accordance with
state requirements.
   (B)   Prior to obtaining any city-issued grading and/or construction
permits, the developer/owner shall provide evidence of compliance with the
general construction permit by providing a copy of the waste discharger’s
identification number (“WDID”) to the City Development Services Department.
§ 8.80.503 NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Discharges of non-storm water from construction activities are
generally prohibited except for those discharges listed in §
8.80.207 or any discharges authorized by the City Engineer or the Regional
Water Quality Control Board (“RWQCB”). The city and the RWQCB will allow the
discharge of certain non-storm water discharges from construction sites
provided that they are in compliance with the discharge limitations specified
in the current general waste discharge requirements for de minimus discharges
issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region.
   (B)   The following discharges are authorized provided they are in
compliance with the permit:
      (1)   Construction dewatering wastes;
      (2)   Wastes associated with well installation, development, test pumping
and purging;
      (3)   Aquifer testing wastes;
      (4)   Dewatering wastes from subterranean seepage, except for discharges
from utility company vaults;
      (5)   Discharges resulting from hydrostatic testing of vessels,
pipelines, tanks and the like;
      (6)   Discharges resulting from the maintenance of potable water supply
pipelines, tanks, reservoirs and the like;
      (7)   Discharges resulting from the disinfection of potable water supply
pipelines, tanks, reservoirs and the like;
      (8)   Discharges from potable water supply systems resulting from system
failures, pressure releases and the like; and
      (9)   Discharges from fire hydrant testing or flushing.
§ 8.80.504 NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Authorized non-storm water discharges under §
8.80.503 shall be reported to the City Engineer at least five days prior to a
planned discharge. Unplanned discharges of non-storm water into the city’s
storm drainage system shall be reported as soon as possible and before any
discharge is initiated. The City Development Services Department shall provide
a “non-storm water discharge notification form” for any developer that is
proposing to discharge any non-storm water from a construction site. The non-
storm water discharge notification form must be submitted to the Development
Services Department for these discharges, at least five days prior to any
planned discharge or as soon as possible for any unplanned discharge.
Monitoring may also be required for these discharges.
      (2)   If the city provided form is not utilized, a report shall be
submitted prior to discharge which includes the following information:
         (a)   Type of proposed discharge;
         (b)   Estimated average and maximum daily flow rate;
         (c)   Frequency and duration of discharge;
         (d)   A description of the proposed treatment system (if appropriate);
and
         (e)   A description of the path from the point of discharge to the
nearest storm drain inlet.
   (B)   All discharges shall be monitored daily for flow volume and shall be
recorded in a daily log by the person responsible for the discharge. Discharges
shall also be sampled during the first 30 minutes of each discharge and weekly
thereafter for continuous discharges for chlorine and total suspended solids.
Monitoring data for flow, chlorine and suspended solids and any other required
constituents shall be reported to the City Development Services Department on a
weekly basis.
§ 8.80.505 BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   All construction projects which could potentially have an adverse impact on
the city’s storm water drainage system or waters of the state shall install
and/or implement appropriate construction and post-construction BMPs, as listed
in their SWQMP or the “California Storm Water Best Management Practice
Handbook,” to reduce pollutants to the maximum extent practicable or to the
extent required by law.
ARTICLE 6. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
§ 8.80.601 NOTICE OF CORRECTION.
   Whenever the City Engineer, or his or her designee, finds that any
discharger has the potential to violate or has already violated any
prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this chapter, any NPDES
storm water permit or the basin plan, the city may serve upon such person a
written notice of correction stating the nature of the violation and the
necessary actions that must be implemented to correct the situation. The NOC
shall stipulate a time period by which the problem must be corrected and the
penalties for non-compliance.
§ 8.80.602 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   When the City Engineer, or his or her authorized representative, finds
that any discharger has failed to comply with a notice of correction or has
violated or continues to violate any prohibition, limitation or requirement
contained in this chapter, any NPDES storm water permit or the basin plan, the
city may serve upon such person a written notice of violation stating the
nature of the violation and the penalties for non-compliance. At a minimum, the
notice of violation shall require that the discharger submit to the City
Engineer, within a time period specified in the notice, a plan indicating the
cause of the violation and corrective actions which will be taken to prevent
recurrence. A discharger shall be guilty of a separate offense for every day
during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by the discharger.
   (B)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 53069.4 and 36900(b), the following
administrative fines shall apply to the issuance of a notice of violation by
the City Engineer, or his or her authorized representative.
      (1)   A first notice of violation shall be issued for a first violation
of this chapter and shall be punishable by an administrative fine not exceeding
$100.
      (2)   A second notice of violation shall be issued for a second violation
of this same ordinance within one year and shall be punishable by an
administrative fine not exceeding $200.
      (3)   A third notice of violation shall be issued for a third violation
of this same ordinance within one year and shall be punishable by an
administrative fine not exceeding $500. Each additional violation of the same
ordinance within one year shall also be punishable by an administrative fine of
$500.
§ 8.80.603 ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.
   The City Engineer may require compliance with any prohibition, limitation or
requirement contained in this chapter, any NPDES storm water permit or the
basin plan, by issuing an administrative order, enforceable in a court of law
or by directly seeking court action. Administrative orders may include
compliance orders, stop work orders, cease and desist orders, termination of
service orders and immediate termination of service orders.
   (A)   Compliance order.
      (1)   (a)   The City Engineer, or his or her designee, may issue a
compliance order to any discharger who fails to correct a violation of this
chapter, any NPDES storm water permit or the basin plan. The order shall be in
writing, specify the violation(s) and require appropriate compliance measures
within a specified time period.
         (b)   The compliance order may include the following terms and
requirements:
            1.   Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably
necessary to eliminate an existing prohibited discharge or illegal connection
or to prevent the imminent threat of a prohibited discharge;
            2.   Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal,
storage, installation of overhead covering or proper disposal of any pollutant
having the potential to contact storm water runoff;
            3.   Installation of storm water treatment devices, containment
structures, wash racks and addition and removal of storm water drains; and
            4.   Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to
prevent imminent threat of or continuing violations of this chapter, including,
but not limited to, requirements for compliance with best management practices
guidance documents promulgated by any federal, state or regional agency.
      (2)   The City Engineer, or his or her designee, may adopt a proposed
compliance schedule submitted by the user or may adopt a revised compliance
schedule if, in his or her judgment, the proposed compliance schedule would
allow the user to cause harm to the receiving waters and/or the city’s storm
drainage system.
      (3)   A compliance order shall require the discharger to pay a $1,000
penalty fee to the city for the issuance thereof.
   (B)   Stop work order.
      (1)   The City Engineer or Building Official may serve a written stop
work order on any person engaged in doing, or causing to be done, new
construction, tenant improvements, alterations or additions, if:
         (a)   No construction permit has been granted by the city;
         (b)   Work has begun prior to the submittal of a written storm water
quality management plan (“SWQMP”) and subsequent approval by the City Engineer,
or his or her designee; or
         (c)   Violations of this article are found at the site of the new
construction, tenant improvements, alterations or additions.
      (2)   Any person served a stop work order shall stop such work forthwith
until written authorization to continue is received from the City Engineer or
Building Official. A stop work order shall require the discharger to pay a
$1,000 penalty fee to the city for the issuance thereof.
   (C)   Cease and desist order.
      (1)   When the City Engineer, or his or her designee, finds that any
industrial and/or commercial discharger has violated or threatens to violate
any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this chapter, any NPDES
storm water permit or the basin plan or NPDES storm water permit, the city may
issue a cease and desist order directing the discharger to:
         (a)   Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or prohibited
discharge to the city’s storm water drainage system;
         (b)   Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the
property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this
chapter; and
         (c)   Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter.
      (2)   A cease and desist order shall require the discharger to pay a
$1,000 penalty fee to the city for the issuance thereof.
   (D)   Termination of service. When the City Engineer finds any industrial
and/or commercial discharger, who has a direct connection into the city’s storm
water drainage system or has violated an administrative order, the City
Engineer may terminate storm drain service to the discharger. The discharger
shall be liable for all costs for termination of storm drain service incurred
by the city. This provision is in addition to any other statues, rules or
regulations authorizing termination of service for delinquency payment or for
any other reasons. Storm drain service shall be re-instituted by the City
Engineer after the discharger has complied with all the provisions of the
administrative order. The discharger shall also be liable for all costs for re-
instituting storm drain service.
   (E)   Immediate termination of service.
      (1)   The City Engineer may immediately suspend storm drain service and
any non-storm water discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the
opinion of the City Engineer, to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health
or welfare of persons or the environment, or which significantly or could
significantly cause pollution to the receiving waters, ground and/or storm
drainage system of the city. Any industrial and/or commercial discharger
notified that their storm drain service has been suspended shall immediately
cease and eliminate the discharge into the city storm water drainage system.
      (2)   In the event of failure to comply voluntarily with the termination
of service order, the City Engineer shall take appropriate steps, including
immediate severance of all applicable storm drain connections. All persons
responsible for a discharge that may endanger the health or welfare of the
community or the environment shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city
in terminating storm drain service. Storm drain service shall be re-instituted
by the City Engineer after the actual or threatened discharge has been
eliminated. A detailed written statement, submitted by the industrial and/or
commercial discharger, describing the cause of the harmful contribution and the
measures to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the City
Engineer within ten working days of the date of storm drain service
termination.
§ 8.80.604 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   (A)   Any discharger may request, or the City Engineer may order, an
administrative hearing, at which time, a discharger who causes or allows or who
has caused or allowed an unauthorized discharge to enter into the city’s storm
water drainage system, or who continues to allow, a violation of this chapter
to exist may show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken
against him or her. The City Administrator, or the City Administrator’s
designee, shall preside over the administrative hearing, at which time each
party, including the discharger and the City Engineer, or his or her designee,
shall have the right to present evidence.
   (B)   A notice of hearing shall be served on the discharger specifying the
time and place of the hearing and referencing the specific violation and/or
violations of this chapter, the reasons why the action is to be taken and the
proposed enforcement action, directing the discharger to show cause before the
hearing officer why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
notice of hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, at least ten working days prior to the hearing.
Service of the notice of hearing may be made on any agent or officer of the
discharger.
§ 8.80.605 ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 54739 and 54740.5, the City Engineer
may issue an administrative complaint to any person who violates this chapter,
any prohibition or limitation thereof or any compliance order, cease and desist
order, stop work order or injunction. The administrative complaint shall allege
the act or failure to act that constitutes the violation, the proposed civil
penalty and the authority under which it is imposed. The administrative
complaint, served on the alleged violator by personal delivery or by certified
mail, shall inform the person served that a hearing before the City
Administrator, or the City Administrator’s designee, shall be conducted within
60 days of the service of the complaint. The right to a hearing may be waived
by the person who has been issued the administrative complaint, in which case
the city shall not conduct a hearing. A person dissatisfied with the decision
of the City Administrator may appeal to the Mayor and City Council of the city
within 30 days of notice of the City Administrator’s decision.
   (B)   If, after the hearing or appeal, if any, it is found that the person
has violated reporting or discharge requirements, the City Administrator or
Mayor and City Council may assess a civil penalty against that person. In
determining the amount of the civil penalty, the City Administrator or Mayor
and City Council may take into consideration all relevant circumstances,
including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
economic benefit derived through any non-compliance, the nature and persistence
of the violation, the length of time over which the violation occurs and
corrective action, if any, attempted or taken by the discharger.
   (C)   Civil penalties may be assessed as follows:
      (1)   In an amount which shall not exceed $3,000 for each day for failing
or refusing to timely comply with any compliance order established by the city;
      (2)   In an amount which shall not exceed $5,000 per violation for each
day of discharge in violation of any discharge limitation, areawide urban
runoff permit condition or requirement issued, reissued or adopted by the city;
      (3)   In an amount which shall not exceed $10 per gallon for discharges
in violation of any stop work order, cease and desist order or other orders, or
prohibition issued, reissued or adopted by the city; and
      (4)   The amount of any civil penalties imposed under this section which
have remained delinquent for a period of 60 days shall constitute a lien
against the real property of the discharger from which the discharge originated
resulting in the imposition of the civil penalty.
   (D)   The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded
with the County Recorder and when recorded shall have the force and effect and
priority of a judgment lien and continue for ten years from the time of
recording unless sooner released, and shall be renewable in accordance with the
provisions of the Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, §§ 683.110 to 683.220,
inclusive.
   (E)   All monies collected under this section shall be deposited in a
special account of the city and shall be made available for the monitoring,
treatment and control of discharges into the city’s storm drainage system or
for other mitigation measures.
   (F)   Unless appealed, an order imposing administrative civil penalties
shall become effective and final upon issuance thereof, and payment shall
become due within 30 days of issuance of an invoice by the city. Copies of
these orders shall be served by personal service or by registered mail upon the
party served with the administrative complaint and upon other persons who
appeared at the hearing and requested a copy.
   (G)   The city may, at its option, elect to petition the Superior Court to
confirm any order establishing civil penalties and enter judgment in conformity
therewith in accordance with the provisions of the Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure, §§ 1285 to 1287.6, inclusive.
§ 8.80.606 COMPENSATION FOR DAMAGES.
   Any person who damages monitoring equipment; has the potential to affect or
affects human health or the environment; discharges pollutants into the city’s
storm drainage system which causes, or has the potential to cause, increased
maintenance of the system, non-routine inspection or sampling of the system,
system blockages or other damage or interference in the city’s storm water
drainage system, or causes any other damages, including the imposition of fines
or penalties on the city by federal, state or local regulatory agencies, shall
be liable to the city for all damages and additional costs, including fines and
penalties. An administrative fee, which shall be fixed by the City
Administrator based on the city’s current overhead cost allocation percentage,
shall be added to these charges and shall be payable to the city within 30
calendar days of invoicing.
§ 8.80.607 APPEALS.
   Any decision of the City Engineer may be appealed. An appeal must be
initiated within ten working days after receipt of the notice of any decision
or action by filing, with the City Engineer, a letter of appeal briefly stating
therein the basis for such appeal. The hearing on appeal shall be held on a
date no more than 15 working days after receipt of the letter of appeal. The
appellant shall be given at least five working days notice of the time and
place of the hearing. The City Administrator, or the City Administrator’s
designee, shall provide the appellant and any other interested party the
reasonable opportunity to be heard and in order to show cause why the
determination of City Engineer should not be upheld. Within 45 working days of
the hearing, the City Administrator, or the City Administrator’s designee,
shall make a written decision regarding the appeal. The decision of the City
Administrator, or the City Administrator’s designee, shall be final. The
imposition of fines or penalties shall be stayed during the appeal period.
§ 8.80.608 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the penalties established by this chapter, any threat to
public health, safety or welfare shall be declared and deemed a public
nuisance. Such public nuisance may be summarily abated and/or remedied by the
City Engineer, and/or civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the City Attorney. The cost of such
abatement, remediation and/or restoration shall be borne by the owner, lessee
or tenant of the property causing the violation. The cost thereof shall be a
lien upon and against the property and such lien shall continue in existence
until the same shall be paid.
ARTICLE 7. JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
§ 8.80.701 LEGAL ACTION.
   The City Attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal, equitable or
injunctive relief in the Superior Court of the county against any person who
has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, the basin
plan, federal or state discharge standards or permit conditions, or who
violates the requirements of any administrative order. In addition to the
penalties provided in this chapter, the City Engineer may recover all
reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporter’s fees, expenses of
litigation by appropriate suit of law against the person(s) found to have
violated any provision of this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations and
permits issued thereunder and other expenses associated with enforcement
activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any
actual damages incurred by the city.
§ 8.80.702 CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   Persons who continue to violate any provision of this chapter shall be
liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of $25,000 but not less than
$3,000 per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term
average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period
of the violation.
   (B)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the discharger’s violation,
corrective actions by the discharger, the compliance history of the discharger
and any factor as justice requires.
   (C)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for taking any other action against a discharger. The city may
institute further legal action to collect such penalties in the event that the
violator of this chapter fails or refuses to pay said penalty within 30 days
from the date that it has been assessed.
§ 8.80.703 CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
   Any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
chapter or permit conditions, or who violates any administrative order or any
other provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon
conviction, is punishable by a fine of not less than $3,000 and/or by
imprisonment for a period of not more than six months. Each such person shall
be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of
which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or
permitted by such discharger, and shall be punishable therefor as provided by
this section.
§ 8.80.704 FALSIFYING INFORMATION.
   Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, storm water
permit or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter
is guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of
not less than $3,000 per day of violation and/or by imprisonment for a period
of not more than six months.
ARTICLE 8. GENERAL CLAUSES
§ 8.80.801 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions, paragraph, word, section or article of this chapter is
invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions,
paragraph, words, sections and other chapters shall not be affected and shall
continue in full force and effect.
§ 8.80.802 CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The Mayor and City Council may establish by ordinance and/or resolution more
stringent limitations and requirements related to discharges into the city’s
storm water drainage system, if deemed necessary.
(Ord. MC-731, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. MC-1167, passed 3-2-2004; Ord. MC-1168,
passed 3-8-2004)
CHAPTER 8.81: SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
8.81.010   Purpose
   
8.81.020   Definitions
   
8.81.030   Non-applicability
   
8.81.040   Alarm business registration
   
8.81.045   Alarm businesses installation and transfer fees
   
8.81.050   Alarm agent registration required
   
8.81.060   Notification of change
   
8.81.070   Alarm system permit
   
8.81.080   Audible alarm requirements
   
8.81.090   Reserved
   
8.81.100   False alarm
   
8.81.110   Notice of name of service or occupant
   
8.81.120   Monitoring services
   
8.81.130   Alarm agents - registration in possession
   
8.81.140   Automatic dialing and taped message alarm system
   
8.81.150   Grounds for revocation of permit - notices, surrender of permit,
reinstatement
   
8.81.160   Enforcement
   
8.81.170   Fines
   
8.81.180   Permit not transferable
§ 8.81.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and regulations
applicable to alarm systems and to provide for punishment for violations of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-773, passed 3-12-1991)
§ 8.81.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM AGENT. Any person who is self-employed or employed either directly or
indirectly by an alarm business whose duties include any of the following:
selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing,
moving or installing an alarm system in or on any building, place or premises.
   ALARM BUSINESS. Any person, firm or corporation conducting or engaged in the
business of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, moving, installing or monitoring an alarm system in or on any
building, place or premises. A business which only sells or leases alarm
devices from a fixed location and does not service, install, monitor or respond
to alarm systems at the protected premises or call upon police to do so is not
an ALARM BUSINESS for the purposes of this chapter.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any device arranged to signal the presence of a hazard
requiring urgent attention and to which police are expected to respond.
   ALARM USER. Any person who has an alarm system installed at his or her place
of business or residence.
   AUDIBLE ALARM. A device designed for the detection of the unauthorized entry
on or attempted entry into a premises or structure or for alerting others of
the commission of an unlawful act or both, and which, when actuated, generates
an audible sound.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING SYSTEM. Any device which automatically sends over regular
telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded message
indicating the existence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which
police are expected to respond.
   COMMON CAUSE. A common technical difficulty or malfunction which causes an
alarm system to generate a series of false alarms, all of which occur within a
72-hour period. The series of false alarms shall be counted as one false alarm
only if the cause of the series of false alarms is repaired before it generates
additional false alarms beyond the 72-hour period, documentation of the repair
is provided to the Police Chief and during the 30-day period following the
repair, the alarm system generates no additional false alarms from the
documented cause.
   FALSE ALARM. An alarm system signal which necessitates or causes response by
police when an emergency does not exist. This does not include alarms caused by
acts of nature.
   INTRUSION ALARM. An alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into
the area protected by the systems.
   PANIC ALARM. An alarm system by which the signal transmission is initiated
by the direct action of a person.
   ROBBERY ALARM. An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person who purchases, leases, contracts for or otherwise
obtains an alarm system or for the servicing or maintenance of an alarm system.
(Ord. MC-125, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-201, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. MC-773,
passed 3-12-1991; Ord. MC-1037, passed 12-22-1998)
§ 8.81.030 NON-APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to audible alarms affixed
to automobiles unless the vehicle alarm is connected to a central monitoring
system.
(Ord. MC-125, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-773, passed 3-12-1991)
§ 8.81.040 ALARM BUSINESS REGISTRATION.
   It is unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or firm to own,
manage, conduct or carry on an alarm business within the city without first
having registered with the Police Department. Registration is not required for
any business which only sells or leases alarm systems from a fixed location
unless the business services, installs, monitors or responds to alarm systems
at the protected premises. Registration shall be accomplished by furnishing
such information as may be required by the Police Department, including, but
not limited to, the full name of the business and a copy of its state issued
license. The Police Department shall notify the alarm business at the time of
such registration that a city business license is required.
(Ord. MC-125, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-236, passed 12-21-1982; Ord. MC-773,
passed 3-12-1991)
§ 8.81.045 ALARM BUSINESSES INSTALLATION AND TRANSFER FEES.
   Alarm businesses shall notify the Police Department of each new alarm system
installed, or when assuming monitoring services in the city.
   (A)   Alarm businesses shall pay a one-time fee for each new alarm system,
residential or commercial, installed in the city.
   (B)   Alarm businesses shall pay a one-time fee for each alarm monitoring
service transfer, residential or commercial, within the city.
   (C)   Fees will be charged at a rate set by resolution of the Mayor and City
Council.
(Ord. MC-1166, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 8.81.050 ALARM AGENT REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, including the owners of an alarm business, to
engage directly in the selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing,
altering, replacing, moving or installing of an alarm system in or on any
building, place or premises within the city without first having registered his
or her name and filed with the Police Chief a copy of the alarm agent
registration card issued by the state. Nothing in this section shall require a
person to so register in order to install, service, repair, alter, replace or
move an alarm system on the premises owned or occupied by that person. Nothing
in this section shall require a person to register who is merely a salesperson
for any business not required to obtain an alarm business permit under the
provisions of §
8.81.040, if the salesperson does not engage in any other activities related to
alarm systems apart from selling. No fee shall be charged, nor shall any
application form be required by the city. The alarm agent shall be notified at
the time of filing his or her state issued identification card with the Police
Department that a city business license is required.
(Ord. MC-125, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-236, passed 12-21-1982)
§ 8.81.060 NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE.
   Any alarm business registered with the Police Department shall immediately
report to the Police Chief any change of address or ownership of the business
or the name or business address of the manager of operations for the area which
includes the city.
(Ord. MC-125, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-773, passed 3-12-1991)
§ 8.81.070 ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall install or use an alarm system without first applying
for an alarm system permit from the Chief of Police, nor shall a person use an
alarm system unless the alarm system permit remains valid and in effect. The
application for an alarm system permit shall be submitted on a form as
prescribed by the Chief of Police and shall include the address of the premises
wherein the system is to be located and the name, address and telephone number
of the applicant and the person or business who will render service or repair
during any hour of the day or night, and the type or types of systems to be
utilized.
   (B)   Separate alarm permits shall be required as follows.
      (1)   A single alarm system permit may be granted to any single-family
residence. The permit may authorize intrusion, panic and/or robbery coverage.
The permit may include the primary residence and any outbuildings (such as
garages, sheds or hobby shops) on the parcel that are not used for commercial
purposes. A separate permit must be issued for any buildings on the property
that are used for commercial purposes. If the residence and the outbuildings
are on separate parcels, separate permits are required for each parcel.
      (2)   A single alarm system permit may be granted to any single unit of
any multi-family residential complex (such as an apartment, a condominium or a
mobile home). The permit may authorize intrusion, panic and/or robbery
coverage. The permit may include the primary residential unit and any
outbuildings (such as stand-alone garages, sheds or hobby shops) used
exclusively by the applicant that are not used for commercial purposes. A
separate permit must be issued for any outbuildings that are used for
commercial purposes. If the residence and the outbuildings are on separate
parcels, separate permits are required for each parcel.
      (3)   A single alarm system permit may be authorized to any commercial
business. The permit may authorize intrusion, panic and/or robbery coverage.
The permit may authorize these types of coverage for any structures used by the
applicant on the parcel. If a commercial business operates on more than one
land parcel, the business must have a separate permit for each parcel of land.
      (4)   If the commercial business is a mall, strip mall or other
commercial building complex, a single permit may be used to provide coverage
for any vacant units, unless they are on separate parcels. If located on
separate parcels, separate permits are required for each parcel. Each
commercial unit rented, leased or sold to another commercial business must be
covered by a separate permit.
      (5)   Each permit is subject to a registration fee and annual fees. Each
permit has its own false alarm count. All structures covered under one permit
use the same false alarm count.
   (C)   An annual permit fee will be charged at a rate set by resolution of
the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-125, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-201, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. MC-460,
passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-773, passed 3-12-1991; Ord. MC-1037, passed 12-22-
1998)
§ 8.81.080 AUDIBLE ALARM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall install or maintain any audible alarm or other alarm
system which upon actuation emits a sound similar to sirens in use on emergency
vehicles or for civil defense purposes.
   (B)   An audible alarm shall contain a means to effect an automatic turnoff
of the alarm within 15 minutes after it is first activated.
   (C)   If an audible alarm has emitted an alarm signal in excess of 30
minutes in any one-hour period, and the alarm business or responsible person
for the protected premises has been notified and does not respond, or
reasonable efforts of notification have been made to no avail, the alarm may be
declared a nuisance and the Police Department may cause such alarm to be
disconnected by a registered alarm agent, the cost thereof to be charged
payable by the alarm user.
(Ord. MC-125, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-201, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. MC-773,
passed 3-12-1991)
§ 8.81.090 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1037, passed 12-22-1998)
§ 8.81.100 FALSE ALARM.
   The city shall charge false alarm fees at a rate set by resolution of the
Mayor and City Council. Each permit has its own false alarm count. All
structures covered under one permit use the same false alarm count.
(Ord. MC-125, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-201, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. MC-773,
passed 3-12-1991; Ord. MC-1037, passed 12-22-1998)
§ 8.81.110 NOTICE OF NAME OF SERVICE OR OCCUPANT.
   (A)   Every alarm user shall file with the Police Department a notice
containing the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified to
render repairs or service and secure the premises during any time the alarm is
actuated. In addition, such notice may be posted. If posted, such notice shall
be placed near the front door of the premises or gate if fenced, and this
notice shall be posted in a position that is clearly visible.
   (B)   In the event that the responsible person for the protected premises is
requested by the Police Department to respond to the premises to render
necessary service, such response and service shall be accomplished promptly.
   (C)   Alarm users shall pay to the city reasonable costs, as determined and
assessed by the Police Chief or Fire Chief, or his or her designee,
respectively, for expenses incurred in securing premises where a burglar alarm
or fire alarm has been activated, whether or not the activation is a false
alarm. The assessment shall be satisfied by the alarm user within 15 days after
the alarm user has been notified of the assessment and the grounds for the
assessment. This section shall apply only to instances where the alarm user has
failed to reasonably respond to notification that an alarm has been activated
on premises owned, occupied or controlled by the alarm user. If the expenses
set forth in the assessment are not paid within 15 days, the alarm user may be
placed on a no response status. The alarm user will be notified by first class
mail of the no response status at the address on the alarm permit. An
additional amount of 10% of the amount of the expenses per month, not to exceed
100%, shall be added to the expenses until paid. This assessment in this
division (C) shall be instituted to cover escalating costs incurred to pursue
delinquent assessments requiring extended enforcement action.
   (D)   Where the Police Chief or Fire Chief, or his or her designee,
respectively, is required to cause the assessment of costs pursuant to the
provisions of this section, he or she shall keep an accounting of the costs
thereof, including administrative expenses for the abatement. The term
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES includes, but is not limited to, the actual expenses
and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and
contracts, inspection of the work, office overhead, filing fees and the costs
of printing and mailings required under this chapter. Upon conclusion of the
assessment, he or she shall submit his or her itemized statement of costs in a
report to the hearing officer and set the same for a hearing before the hearing
officer. Notice of the time and place of the hearing and a copy of the report
shall be given by the respective department to the alarm permit holder to which
the assessments relate, and to any other interested person requesting the same,
by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at his or her
last known address at least five days in advance of the hearing. The hearing
shall be heard before the hearing officer in the Council Chambers at City Hall,
300 North “D” Street, San Bernardino, California, at such date and time as
provided by resolution.
   (E)   At the time set for hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and
consider all objections or protest to the assessment and may continue the
hearing from time to time. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
officer shall allow or overrule any or all objections. The decision of the
hearing officer is final.
(Ord. MC-125, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-201, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. MC-773,
passed 3-12-1991; Ord. MC-1037, passed 12-22-1998)
§ 8.81.120 MONITORING SERVICES.
   Every alarm business which monitors an alarm system located within the city
shall maintain on file a current listing of all such alarm systems, including
the alarm permit number and the name, address and telephone number of the
individual or individuals from whom entry to the premises may be obtained. Said
information shall be available to the Police Department upon request of any
authorized representative thereof. The alarm permit number assigned to an alarm
system by the Police Department shall be given to the police/fire dispatcher at
the time an alarm is reported to the police/fire communications center by an
alarm company, a central monitoring station, a telephone answering service or
any other business that monitors and reports alarms.
(Ord. MC-125, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-773, passed 3-12-1991; Ord. MC-1037,
passed 12-22-1998)
§ 8.81.130 ALARM AGENTS - REGISTRATION IN POSSESSION.
   Every person engaged in installing, repairing, servicing, altering,
replacing, moving or removing an alarm system or an audible alarm system, as
defined in this chapter, on any premises within the city, other than those
owned or occupied by said person, shall carry on his or her person, at all
times, while so engaged a valid state alarm agent registration card and shall
display such card to any police officer upon request.
(Ord. MC-125, passed 1-7-1982)
§ 8.81.140 AUTOMATIC DIALING AND TAPED MESSAGE ALARM SYSTEM.
   It is unlawful for any person to install, use or cause to be used any
telephonic device which is activated to automatically select a public telephone
line of the city to reproduce a prerecorded message to report anything
requiring urgent attention and to which police are expected to respond.
(Ord. MC-125, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-773,
passed 3-12-1991)
§ 8.81.150 GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OF PERMIT - NOTICES, SURRENDER OF PERMIT,
REINSTATEMENT.
   (A)   The following shall constitute grounds for revocation of permit:
      (1)   The failure to observe any of the regulations or other provisions
of this chapter;
      (2)   If the alarm system for which the permit is issued emits ten or
more false alarms within any consecutive 365-day period;
      (3)   If the responsible person for a protected premises refuses to
respond promptly when requested by the Police Department;
      (4)   The permittee, his or her employee or agent has knowingly made a
false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application
for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed as prescribed by
the provisions of this chapter; and
      (5)   If the fees established by this section are not paid within 15 days
from the date of the invoice rendered for such fee.
   (B)   The Police Chief shall serve the permittee with a written order of
revocation. The order shall state the reason for revocation and shall be
effective immediately if personally served, or 48 hours after it is deposited,
certified mail, return receipt requested, with postage prepaid in the United
States mail.
   (C)   The permittee shall surrender the permit to the Police Chief upon
notification of revocation. Any alarm system shall be forthwith disconnected
and cease operating, and shall not be put into operation until a new permit is
issued.
   (D)   Reinstatement of revoked permit may be granted after compliance with
one of the following.
      (1)   Full correction of the deficiencies in the alarm system, that
correction documented in writing and submitted to the Chief of Police showing
that:
         (a)   Mechanical malfunctions have been corrected, proof being from
the alarm business;
         (b)   User errors have been corrected, proof being from the alarm
user; or
         (c)   Installation of a new alarm by a different alarm business, proof
being from the new alarm business.
      (2)   In the case where the correction is made as set forth in divisions
(D)(1)(a) or (D)(1)(b) above, the Chief of Police will order a technical
inspection by a qualified person to determine whether the deficiencies have
been corrected, in which event a $100 inspection fee shall be paid prior to the
grant of a new permit at that location.
      (3)   A formal appeal of the order of revocation may be made within 15
days of the date of revocation by filing a notice of appeal with the office of
the City Administrator, City Hall, 300 No. “D” Street, sixth floor, San
Bernardino, California, 92401. The City Administrator shall render a decision
on the appeal within ten days following receipt of the appeal, with notice to
the appellant and Police Chief. The City Administrator’s decision on the
revocation shall be final and non-appealable.
   (E)   Upon reinstatement, a new alarm system permit shall be issued as set
forth in §
8.81.070.
(Ord. MC-125, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-201, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. MC-773,
passed 3-12-1991)
§ 8.81.160 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter is guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is
punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010. Revocation of a permit is not a defense against prosecution.
   (B)   The Police Chief shall have the authority to institute an immediate no
response policy for violation of any portion of the ordinance incorporated in
this chapter. Such no response policy will be taken only after written notice
has been given to the alarm user.
(Ord. MC-125, passed 1-7-1982; Ord. MC-201, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. MC-773,
passed 3-12-1991)
§ 8.81.170 FINES.
   The fines assessed in this chapter shall be made payable to the city. The
Department of Finance and Management Services shall be responsible for account
maintenance and collection.
(Ord. MC-773, passed 3-12-1991; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 8.81.180 PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No alarm permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
assignable or transferable.
(Ord. MC-773, passed 3-12-1991)
CHAPTER 8.82: ESTABLISHMENT OF EXTRAORDINARY LAW ENFORCEMENT SERVICES
Section
   
8.82.010   Purpose
   
8.82.020   Definitions
   
8.82.030   Reimbursement of costs for scheduled events
   
8.82.040   Extraordinary fees
   
8.82.050   Unscheduled events
   
8.82.060   Appeal
§ 8.82.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the intent of the City Council, by the adoption of this chapter,
to impose on and collect from the person(s) in charge of or responsible for an
event that generates extraordinary cost to the city over and above the cost of
providing normal law enforcement services and police protection citywide. The
event for which charges are imposed are those voluntarily elected by the person
(s) responsible for the services, or his or her parent, guardian or the person
having custody of a minor. The purpose of this chapter is to recover the actual
cost to the city incurred by providing these police services. The City Council
believes it is necessary that persons voluntarily incurring special and
extraordinary police services pay to the city the reasonable cost of providing
such services.
   (B)   This chapter is not intended to apply, and shall not apply, to events
of a political or religious nature, or any event involving speech protected by
the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution or by the California Constitution.
(Ord. MC-772, passed 3-12-1991; Ord. MC-1248, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 8.82.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EVENT. A gathering of two or more persons on a premises within the city at
the invitation, request or consent of the person in charge or control of the
premises.
   EXTRAORDINARY LAW ENFORCEMENT SERVICES. Those necessarily and reasonably
incurred by the city in the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
and in the protection of property which said services are in addition to police
services the city would normally provide without a special charge and which
have arisen because of activities or events.
   NUISANCE. Includes both public and private NUISANCES defined in the
California Civil Code.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. The owner, manager or occupant in charge of or in control
of the premises at which an event is occurring. If the PERSON IN CHARGE is a
minor, his or her parents or legal guardian is presumed to be the PERSON IN
CHARGE.
   PREMISES. A building and surroundings or any open area within the city.
   SCHEDULED EVENT. An event where the person scheduling the same has
determined that because of its nature, extraordinary police services will be
necessary over and above that normally provided by the city for the protection
of the public health safety and welfare. An event is SCHEDULED when written
notice thereof setting forth the time, place and nature of the event has been
filed with the Chief of Police.
   UNSCHEDULED EVENT. One requiring extraordinary police services over and
above those normally provided for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare and which has occurred without advance notice to the city.
UNSCHEDULED EVENTS include, but are not limited to, loud and boisterous
conduct, noises and activities; disturbing the peace; a congregation of two or
more persons in intoxicated conditions or under the influence of drugs or
alcohol; fighting; use of obscene or inflammatory language; loud music
constituting a nuisance or disturbing the peace; activities causing excessive
pedestrian or vehicular traffic and parking problems and congestion; vehicular
racing and cruising; events occurring after 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. of the
following day; use and display of narcotics, illegal drugs and controlled
substances and paraphernalia for its use; the congregation of two or more
persons using illegal drugs, narcotics or controlled substances; or
congregating in a noisy or rowdy crowd, indecent exposure and lewd conduct.
(Ord. MC-772, passed 3-12-1991)
§ 8.82.030 REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS FOR SCHEDULED EVENTS.
   (A)   Any person planning a scheduled event where extraordinary law
enforcement services may be required shall register the event in advance with
the Chief of Police at least five working days before the occurrence of the
event.
   (B)   The registration shall be in writing and shall include the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address and phone number of the person in charge and who
will be available at all times during the event;
      (2)   The place and time the event will occur; and
      (3)   The nature of the event and the number of requested police officers
or other law enforcement services.
(Ord. MC-772, passed 3-12-1991)
§ 8.82.040 EXTRAORDINARY FEES.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall review the registration and set forth the
conditions necessary for providing police protection during said event. If the
Chief of Police determines that the police services necessary are
extraordinary, he or she, or his or her designate, shall determine the cost of
said extraordinary services and advise the person planning the event prior to
the commencement of said event of the nature and extent of law enforcement
services to be provided and the cost thereof.
   (B)   Upon receipt of said written notification, the person in charge of
said event may:
      (1)   Accept said charges and pay the same in advance of the event. In
such an event, said person shall not be charged for any extraordinary law
enforcement services in excess of the amount paid even though the actual cost
of said services exceed the amount paid;
      (2)   Decide to schedule the event but contest the cost of providing the
extraordinary services. In that event, the actual cost of providing law
enforcement services to the extraordinary event shall be determined upon its
completion and a bill sent to the person in charge;
      (3)   Elect to provide private security for the event in the manner
directed by the Chief of Police to include the number of security officers and
qualifications/capabilities of the security officers; and
      (4)   Elect not to schedule the event and notify the Chief of Police or
appropriate area commander in person or by mail, no later than 24 hours prior
to the scheduled event.
(Ord. MC-772, passed 3-12-1991)
§ 8.82.050 UNSCHEDULED EVENTS.
   (A)   Except as provided herein below, if an unscheduled event occurs and a
law enforcement officer investigating the matter determines that the same is a
threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare or constitutes a
nuisance, said officer may, in addition to any other duty or responsibility
imposed upon him or her by law, give written warning notice to the person in
charge of the premises that if a second response is necessary because of a
continuation of any objectionable activity that the person in charge will be
held liable to the city for the cost of all subsequent law enforcement services
necessary to abate the disturbance or other activity giving rise to law
enforcement services over and above the normal services expended in connection
with the first call.
   (B)   If an unscheduled event occurs and a law enforcement officer
investigating the matter determines that the same is a threat to the public
peace, health, safety or general welfare or constitutes a nuisance of an
immediate nature such that a written warning is not feasible, a written warning
shall not be required and the person in charge will be held liable to the city
for the cost of all law enforcement services necessary to abate the disturbance
or other activity giving rise to law enforcement services over and above the
normal services expended in connection with the call.
   (C)   (1)   The personnel and equipment of the law enforcement agency
utilized after the first warning, if provided, to control or abate the nuisance
or to protect the public peace, health, safety or general welfare shall be
deemed to be extraordinary law enforcement services over and above the normal
services provided citywide and the cost of said extraordinary law enforcement
services, including damage to city or law enforcement property, shall be billed
to and is the legal responsibility of the person in charge. In the event a
written warning is not feasible, then personnel and equipment of the law
enforcement agency called in, including, but not limited to, mutual aid
agencies, to control or abate the nuisance or to protect the public peace,
health, safety or general welfare shall be deemed to be extraordinary law
enforcement services over and above the normal services provided citywide and
the cost of said extraordinary law enforcement services, including damage to
city or law enforcement property, shall be billed to and is the legal
responsibility of the person in charge.
      (2)   In the event that any provision of this chapter, or any part
thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstances, is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by a
court of competent jurisdiction on its face or as applied, such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter, or any
part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance or of
said provision as applied to any other person or circumstance. It is declared
to be the legislative intent of the city that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective provision not been
included herein.
(Ord. MC-772, passed 3-12-1991; Ord. MC-1223, passed 4-18-2006)
§ 8.82.060 APPEAL.
   Any individual aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police may, within
five working days of the receipt of said written bill, request a review of the
matter before the City Administrator who shall, along with a representative of
the law enforcement agency, review the necessity of the services and the cost
thereof with the individual appealing the determination of said costs. The City
Administrator may, in his or her discretion, determine that the cost of said
charges in all fairness and the administration of justice should be reduced or
terminated based upon reasonable evidence warranting the same. Any individual
aggrieved by the decision of the City Administrator may appeal that decision in
writing to the City Council by written notice filed with the City Clerk within
five working days of the decision of the City Administrator. Unless appealed,
the decision of the City Administrator is final. In the event of non-payment,
the City Attorney is authorized and directed to bring all necessary legal
actions to collect the costs of said services.
(Ord. MC-772, passed 3-12-1991)
CHAPTER 8.83: SOCIAL HOST ACCOUNTABILITY
Section
   
8.83.010   Definitions
   
8.83.020   Consumption unlawful
   
8.83.030   Hosting, permitting or allowing a gathering where minors consuming
alcoholic beverages, marijuana and other controlled substances prohibited
   
8.83.040   Chapter shall not apply
   
8.83.050   Violation - penalty
   
8.83.060   Severability
§ 8.83.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Any ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Includes alcohols, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains
0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes wither
alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES. A drug or substance whose possession and use are
regulated under the Controlled Substance Abuse Act, being Cal. Health and
Safety Code, Division 10, commencing with § 11000. Such term does not include
any drug or substance for which the individual found to have consumed such a
substance has a valid prescription by a licensed medical practitioner
authorized to issue such a prescription.
   EXTRAORDINARY LAW ENFORCEMENT FEE. The actual cost associated with response
by law enforcement, fire and other emergency response provider to a gathering,
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Actual salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire or other
emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to,
remaining at or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative
costs attributable to such response;
      (2)   The actual cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement,
fire or other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at
or leaving the scene of the gathering;
      (3)   The actual cost of repairing any city equipment or property
damaged, and the actual costs of the use of any such equipment, in responding
to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a gathering; and
      (4)   Any other allowable and reasonable costs related to the enforcement
of this chapter.
   EXTRAORDINARY LAW ENFORCEMENT SERVICES. The assignment of police officers
and services during a second or subsequent call to a gathering after the
distribution of a written notice that the gathering violates the law, or a
first response if it is determined pursuant to Chapter 8.82 that notice is
infeasible.
   GATHERING. A party, gathering or event where a group of three or more
persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social
activity.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor; or
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the
court.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 21 years of age.
   PARENT. A person who is the natural parent, adopted parent or step-parent of
a minor.
   PERSON RESPONSIBLE. The person that knows or should reasonably know that the
subject premises are being used to host, allow or permit a gathering. Such
person(s) shall rebuttably be presumed to be, in order of priority:
      (1)   The owner(s) of the premises where the gathering takes place;
      (2)   The tenant(s) of the premises where the gathering takes place;
      (3)   The person(s) who hosted, permitted or allowed the gathering; and/
or
      (4)   In the event that the person responsible is a minor, then the
parent(s) or guardian(s) of that minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and
common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
(Ord. MC-1361, passed 8-2-2011)
§ 8.83.020 CONSUMPTION UNLAWFUL.
   Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to:
   (A)   Consume, at any public place or any places open to the public, any
alcoholic beverage, marijuana or controlled substance; or
   (B)   Consume, at any place not open to the public, any alcoholic beverage,
unless in connection with the consumption of an alcoholic beverage that minor
is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian.
(Ord. MC-1361, passed 8-2-2011)
§ 8.83.030 HOSTING, PERMITTING OR ALLOWING A GATHERING WHERE MINORS CONSUMING
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, MARIJUANA AND OTHER CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any person,
having control of any premises, who knows, or should reasonably know, that he
or she has hosted, permitted or allowed a gathering to take place at said
premises, where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, marijuana or
other controlled substance whenever the person having control of the premises
wither knows or reasonably should have known when a minor has consumed an
alcoholic beverage, marijuana or other controlled substance to allow said
consumption to occur.
   (B)   (1)   It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who
knows, or should know, that he or she has hosted, permitted or allowed a
gathering at said premises, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the
consumption of alcoholic beverages, marijuana or other controlled substance by
any minor at the gathering.
      (2)   Reasonable steps include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Controlling access to alcoholic beverages, marijuana and other
controlled substances at the gathering;
         (b)   Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages, marijuana and
other controlled substances at the gathering;
         (c)   Verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by
inspecting drivers licenses or other government issued identification cards to
ensure minors do not consume alcoholic beverages, marijuana or other controlled
substances while at the gathering; and
         (d)   Supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.
   (C)   Whenever a person having control of a premises is present at the
premises at the time that a minor possesses or consumes any alcoholic
beverages, marijuana or other controlled substance therein, it shall be prima
facie evidence that such person had or should have had the knowledge specified
in division (A) above.
   (D)   A person who hosts, permits or allows a gathering shall be deemed to
have actual or constructive knowledge that a minor has consumed or possessed
alcoholic beverages, marijuana or other controlled substances if the person has
not taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption or possession of
alcoholic beverages, marijuana or other controlled substances by minors as set
out in division (B) above.
   (E)   A person who hosts, permits or allows a gathering may be liable for
extraordinary law enforcement fee if extraordinary law enforcement services are
necessary to handle the gathering.
   (F)   A person who hosts, permits or allows a gathering shall not be in
violation of this chapter if he or she seeks immediate assistance from the City
Police Department or other law enforcement agency to remove any person who
refuses to abide by the hosts’ performance of the duties imposed by this
chapter or terminate the gathering because the host has been unable to prevent
minors from consuming or possession alcoholic beverages, marijuana or other
controlled substance despite taking all reasonable steps to do so, as long as
such request is made before any other person makes a complaint about the
gathering.
(Ord. MC-1361, passed 8-2-2011)
§ 8.83.040 CHAPTER SHALL NOT APPLY.
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to any location or place regulated by the
State Department of Alcohol and Beverage Control.
   (B)   Violation of this chapter may be enforced or punished in any manner
prescribed by law, or through any other process or procedure followed by this
code or any other applicable law.
(Ord. MC-1361, passed 8-2-2011)
§ 8.83.050 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
   (B)   Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any person having
control of any premises who knows or should reasonably know that he or she has
hosted, permitted or allowed a gathering to take place at said premises, where
at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, marijuana or other
controlled substance whenever the person having control of the premises wither
knows, or reasonably should have known, when a minor has consumed an alcoholic
beverage, marijuana or other controlled substance to allow said consumption to
occur.
(Ord. MC-1361, passed 8-2-2011)
§ 8.83.060 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any sentence, section
or other part of this chapter should be found invalid, such invalidity shall
not affect the remaining provisions, and the remaining provisions shall
continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. MC-1361, passed 8-2-2011)
CHAPTER 8.84: CASTOR BEAN PLANTS
Section
   
8.84.010   Destruction and removal - notice to owner
   
8.84.020   Failure to remove an infraction
§ 8.84.010 DESTRUCTION AND REMOVAL - NOTICE TO OWNER.
   Whenever it comes to the attention of the health officer, or other
designated officer, that a castor bean (Ricinus communis) plant is growing upon
any lot or premises in the city in such a manner as to cause a nuisance or
menace to health, he or she shall order such castor bean (Ricinus communis)
plant destroyed and removed. Notice of the order shall be in writing addressed
to the owner or occupant thereof and shall set forth the time within which the
destruction and removal shall be completed.
(Ord. 2417, passed 2-14-1962; Ord. 821, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 8.84.020 FAILURE TO REMOVE AN INFRACTION.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly fail, refuse or neglect to
destroy and remove such castor bean (Ricinus communis) plant when so ordered by
the health officer in the manner specified in §
8.84.010. Such failure, refusal or neglect constitutes an infraction, which,
upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 2417, passed 2-14-1962; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. 821, passed
8-9-2021)
CHAPTER 8.87: RAILROAD COMPANIES
Section
   
8.87.010   Maintenance of tracks - responsibility
   
8.87.020   Compliance with section 8.87.010 - violation and penalty
   
8.87.030   Unlawful to blow whistle or horn except as danger signal
   
8.87.040   Smoke emission standards
   
8.87.050   Reserved
   
8.87.060   Violation of sections 8.87.030 through 8.87.060 - penalty
§ 8.87.010 MAINTENANCE OF TRACKS - RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be the duty of any person or company owning, operating or having
any railroad or street car line within the corporate limits of the city to so
keep and maintain the tracks of all such roads so that the rails thereon shall
be even and flush with the surface of the pavement or street on each side of
and between the rails, so that the same shall present the least possible
obstruction to the face use and enjoyment of such streets by the public.
(Ord. 106, passed 1-26-1892)
§ 8.87.020 COMPLIANCE WITH SECTION 8.87.010 - VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   It is the duty of the City Director of Public Services to see that the
provisions of §
8.87.010 are complied with, and he or she shall notify all persons or companies
who own, operate or have any such railroads or street car lines within the
corporate limits of the city, and where tracks or rails are not kept even and
flush with the surface of the pavement or street along the line of such tracks,
to place the same in such condition within 30 days from such notice and every
person who suffers or maintains any track or road bed, had or used for the
purpose of operating such roads, or suffers or permits any rails, ties, track
or road bed, whether used or not, to be and remain above or below the surface
of any such pavement or street, so as to prevent the full use and enjoyment
thereof, after said time, is guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction
thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 106, passed 1-26-1892; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985)
§ 8.87.030 UNLAWFUL TO BLOW WHISTLE OR HORN EXCEPT AS DANGER SIGNAL.
   It is unlawful for any person to blow, or cause to be blown, any whistle or
horn on any locomotive or engine used on any railroad track within the city
except as a danger signal to avoid an impending accident.
(Ord. 1785, passed 4-8-1947)
§ 8.87.040 SMOKE EMISSION STANDARDS.
   It is unlawful for any person or company to operate a locomotive or engine
within the city limits in such a manner that the smoke emitted from such engine
or locomotive exceeds or is greater in density than number one, as fixed and
determined by Ringlemann’s Scale for Grading Density of Smoke.
(Ord. 1785, passed 4-8-1947)
§ 8.87.050 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-402, passed 8-21-1984)
§ 8.87.060 VIOLATION OF SECTIONS 8.87.030 THROUGH 8.87.060 - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §§
8.87.030 through
8.87.040 is guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is
punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 1785, passed 4-8-1947; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 8.90: MOBILE HOME RENTS
Section
   
8.90.010   Title
   
8.90.020   Statement of purpose
   
8.90.030   Application
   
8.90.040   Definitions
   
8.90.050   Exemptions from coverage
   
8.90.060   Registration
   
8.90.080   Space rent ceiling or maximum allowable space
   
8.90.090   Space rent ceiling adjustment - initial adjustment
   
8.90.100   Space rent ceiling adjustment - annual adjustment
   
8.90.105   Required certification on rental adjustment notice
   
8.90.110   Powers and duties of the City Manager
   
8.90.120   Petition by tenant
   
8.90.130   Petition by landlord
   
8.90.140   Conduct of proceedings
   
8.90.150   Priorities
   
8.90.160   Rent adjustment regulations
   
8.90.170   Net operating income
   
8.90.180   Gross income
   
8.90.190   Allowable operating expenses
   
8.90.200   Operating expenses not allowable
   
8.90.210   Presumption of fair base year net operating income
   
8.90.220   Rebutting the presumption
   
8.90.230   Determination of base year net operating income
   
8.90.240   Determination of current year net operating income
   
8.90.250   Schedule of increases in operating expenses
   
8.90.260   Allowable rent adjustments
   
8.90.270   Discretionary considerations
   
8.90.280   Limit on increases pending hearing or litigation
   
8.90.290   Rent adjustments for reduction in services
   
8.90.300   Quantum of proof and burden of proof
   
8.90.310   Hearing officer decision final
   
8.90.320   Judicial review
   
8.90.330   Termination of tenancy
   
8.90.340   Remedies for violation
   
8.90.350   Periodic review of chapter
   
8.90.360   Chapter to be liberally construed
   
8.90.370   Reserved
   
8.90.380   Reserved
   
8.90.390   Reserved
   
8.90.400   Reserved
   
8.90.410   Reserved
   
8.90.420   Reserved
   
8.90.430   Reserved
§ 8.90.010 TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the “Mobile Home Park Rent Stabilization
Ordinance” of the city.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.020 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   (A)   (1)   Mobile home owners have a substantial investment in their
residences and appurtenances for which space is rented or leased. Alternate
sites for relocation of mobile homes are difficult to find due to the shortage
of vacant spaces; the restrictions of age, size or style of mobile homes
permitted in many parks; and related to the installation of mobile homes,
including permits, landscaping and site preparation. Additionally, the cost of
moving a mobile home is substantial, and the risk of damage in moving is
significant.
      (2)   The result of these conditions is the creation of a captive market
of mobile home owners and tenants. This immobility, in turn, contributes to the
creation of a great imbalance in the bargaining relationship between park
owners and mobile home park tenants in favor of the park owners.
   (B)   Because mobile homes are often occupied by senior citizens, persons on
fixed income and persons of low- or moderate-income, exorbitant rent
adjustments fall upon these individuals with particular harshness. The
continuing possibility of unreasonable space rental adjustments in mobile home
parks threatens to diminish the value of the investment of the mobile home
owners. Further, existing state law permits mobile home park owners to require
mobile home owners to make modifications to their homes for reasons of
aesthetics or conformity to park standards that amount to capital improvements
which would accrue to the benefit of the park owner by potentially increasing
the market value of the park itself.
   (C)   This Council finds and declares it necessary to facilitate and
encourage fair bargaining between mobile home owners and park owners in order
to achieve mutually satisfactory agreements regarding space rental rates in
mobile home parks. Absent such agreements, this Council further finds and
declares it necessary to protect the owners and residents of mobile homes from
unreasonable space rental adjustments while simultaneously recognizing and
providing for the need of park owners to receive a just and reasonable return
on their property.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.030 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all mobile home residential
rental spaces located within the city except if otherwise exempt from the
provisions of this title, as such exemptions are provided for hereinafter.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to supersede any provision of Cal.
Civil Code, §§ 798 et seq.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager, or his or her designee.
   CONSUMER PRICE INDEX or C.P.I. The Index known as the “Consumer Price Index
for all Urban Wage Consumers: for the Los Angeles - Long Beach - Anaheim Area,”
(base year, 1967), and if published, “for the San Bernardino - Riverside -
Ontario Area” for the year 1984, and thereafter. These documents are published
by the United States Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics.
   HEARING OFFICER. An individual appointed by the Mayor and City Council to
hear matters on which testimony may be taken.
   LANDLORD. Any owner, lessor, operator or manager of a mobile home park.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure designed for human habitation and for being moved
on a street or highway under permit pursuant to the Cal. Vehicle Code, § 35790.
MOBILE HOME does not include recreational vehicle, as defined in the Cal. Civil
Code, § 799.29, or a commercial modular, as defined in the Cal. Health and
Safety Code, § 18218.
   MOBILE HOME OWNER or RESIDENT. Any person entitled to occupy a mobile home
dwelling space pursuant to ownership thereof or a rental or lease agreement
with the owner thereof.
   MOBILE HOME PARK OWNER or PARK OWNER. The owner, lessor, operator, manager
or designated agent thereof of a mobile home park; sometimes referred to as
OWNER.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE or SPACE. The site within a mobile home park intended,
designed or used for the location or accommodation of a mobile home and any
accessory structures or appurtenances attached thereto or used in conjunction
therewith.
   RENT. The consideration, including any bonus, benefit or gratuity, demanded
or received by a landlord for the use and occupancy, including services and
amenities, of a residential rental space.
   RENT ADJUSTMENTS. Any rent increase or decrease demanded of or paid by a
tenant, including any reduction in housing services without a corresponding
reduction in the monies demanded or paid for rent.
   RENTAL AGREEMENT. An agreement between a mobile home park owner and tenant
establishing the terms and conditions of a tenancy in a mobile home park. A
lease is a RENTAL AGREEMENT.
   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL SPACE. Any mobile home space occupied by any person other
than the owner of the park for payment of rent pursuant to an oral or written
lease, or other form of rental agreement.
   SPACE RENT.
      (1)   Means the consideration, including any bonuses, benefits or
gratuities demanded or received for and in connection with the use or occupancy
of a mobile home space within a mobile home park, or for housing services
provided and security deposits, but exclusive of any amounts paid for the use
of the mobile home as a dwelling unit. The use or occupancy of a mobile home
space shall include the exercise of all rights and privileges and the use of
facilities, services and amenities accruing to the residents thereof.
      (2)   SPACE RENT shall not include any separately billed utility fees and
charges for natural gas or liquid propane gas, electricity, water, cable
television, garbage or refuse service and sewer service.
   TENANCY. The right of a tenant to the use of a mobile home site within a
mobile home park on which to locate, maintain and occupy a mobile home, site
improvements and accessory structures; for human habitation, including the use
of the services and facilities of the mobile home park.
   TENANT. Any person entitled to or proposing to occupy such mobile home space
pursuant to an oral or written lease with the owner thereof, or pursuant to
some other rental agreement with the owner, lessor, operator or manager
thereof.
   VACANCY. The condition deemed to have occurred upon the removal of any
mobile home from a mobile home park.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.050 EXEMPTIONS FROM COVERAGE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following.
   (A)   New space or first time space exemption. Space rent or space rent
adjustments for new mobile home spaces first rented after the effective date of
this chapter shall be exempt from the provisions of the chapter to the extent
that those rents would have been controlled had the spaces been previously
occupied. There shall be no prospective exemption in such circumstances,
however, as to rents that may be adjusted annually under this chapter after a
space is first rented. In such cases, the base date for purposes of determining
permissible future rent adjustments shall be the date of first rental or
conveyance.
   (B)   Vacancies.
      (1)   If the mobile home space is voluntarily vacated by the tenant, or
vacated pursuant to Cal. Civil Code, § 798.56, the landlord may adjust the
rental rate to any amount as provided in division (A) above.
      (2)   If the mobile home is sold and is to remain on-site, the landlord
may increase the rental rate for the new resident by an amount not to exceed
10% of the then existing rent. Any rent increase pursuant to this division (B)
(2) shall be implemented at the time the new resident first occupies the space
and/or first enters into a rental agreement with the landlord.
      (3)   The implementation of any rent increase allowed under this division
(B) shall not change the anniversary date for the annual permissive
inflationary adjustment to rent allowed under §
8.90.100(A).
      (4)   A vacancy is voluntary if the tenant voluntarily and without
coercion by the landlord vacates the rental space or if the tenant dies and
there is no surviving cohabitant.
      (5)   Where the rent is increased pursuant to this division (B), the
landlord shall, at the time the rent increase is implemented, provide the new
tenant with written notice of the previous base rent for the space, the new
base rent for the space in both dollar and percentage terms and the anniversary
date for the space for purposes of the annual permissive inflationary
adjustment to rent allowed under §
8.90.100(A).
      (6)   The rent increases allowed under this division (B) shall be in
addition to any other rent increases authorized by this chapter, including, but
not limited to, the annual permissive inflationary adjustment to rent allowed
under §
8.90.100(A).
      (7)   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, nothing in this
chapter shall preclude any landlord from implementing any rent increases that
are exempt under the provisions of the California Mobilehome Residency Law,
including any rent increases that are exempt under Cal. Civil Code, §§ 798.17,
798.41 and/or 798.49.
(Ord. MC-1432, passed 11-23-2016; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Mobilehome Residency Law Protection Act, see Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§
18800 through 18806
§ 8.90.060 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Within 60 calendar days after the effective date of this chapter,
mobile home park owners are required to register all mobile home parks and
mobile home rental spaces within such parks with the City Manager.
   (B)   The initial registration shall include: the name(s), business address
(es), business telephone number(s) of each person or legal entity possessing an
ownership interest in the park and the nature of such interest; the number of
mobile home rental spaces within the park; a rent schedule reflecting space
rents within the park on the effective date of this chapter; a listing of all
other charges, including utilities not included in space rent, paid by mobile
home residents within the park and the approximate amount of each such charge;
and the name and address to which all required notices and correspondence may
be sent.
   (C)   The City Manager is empowered to establish procedures for requiring
such re-registration as he or she deems necessary.
   (D)   No park owner shall be eligible to receive any rent ceiling adjustment
as provided for under the provisions of this chapter unless such current
registration as may then be required for the mobile home park is on file with
the City Manager at the time the petition for the rent ceiling adjustment is
filed.
   (E)   The registration and re-registration requirement provided for in this
section, or which may be hereafter established by the City Manager, shall apply
to all mobile home parks including those exempt from the space rent ceiling
limitation by reason of the existence of a valid space rent agreement.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.080 SPACE RENT CEILING OR MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SPACE.
   (A)   Beginning the first month which commences following the day after the
effective date of this chapter when originally adopted on March 24, 1993, no
mobile home park owner shall charge space rent for any mobile home space in an
amount greater than the space rent in effect on December 31, 1988. The space
rent in effect on that date shall be known as the “space rent ceiling.”
   (B)   If there was no space rent in effect on December 31, 1988, the space
rent ceiling shall be the space rent that was charged on the first date that
space rent was charged after December 31, 1988.
   (C)   If a mobile home park is exempted from the application of this chapter
by reason of the existence of a space rent agreement and this agreement
expires, the space rent ceiling for that park shall be the space rent in effect
on the date the agreement expires.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.090 SPACE RENT CEILING ADJUSTMENT - INITIAL ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   No adjustment in space rent ceilings shall be permitted except as
provided for herein.
   (B)   A park owner shall be entitled to an initial permissive adjustment
gross space rental income equal to 80% of the percentage increase in the
consumer price index (“CPI”) from the end of the base year (1988) to the date
of application for the adjustment. The percentage adjustment in the CPI shall
be calculated by subtracting the CPI reported for December 1989 from the most
recently reported monthly CPI preceding the application and then dividing this
remainder by the December 1989 CPI.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.100 SPACE RENT CEILING ADJUSTMENT - ANNUAL ADJUSTMENT.
   Commencing in calendar year 1990, park owners shall be entitled to the
following annual adjustments.
   (A)   Permissive adjustment. A park owner shall be entitled to an annual
permissive adjustment of gross space rental income equal to 80% of the
percentage adjustment in the CPI from the date of the most recent initial or
annual adjustment to the date of application for the proposed adjustment.
   (B)   Net operating income adjustment.
      (1)   In the event a park owner believes he or she does not receive a
just and reasonable return on park property after receiving the maximum
permissive adjustment provided for above, said park owner may, upon payment of
a filing fee established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council, file an
application with the City Manager for an adjustment of the space rent ceiling,
providing adequate justification for the proposed increase.
      (2)   If the City Manager shall designate a form for the filing of such
petition, such petition shall be filed upon such form. If no such form shall be
designated, such petition shall be in writing, verified by the applicant and
shall contain the names, address and telephone number of the applicant; the
name and address of the tenant of each rental space which would be affected if
the petition were granted; and a statement of the facts giving rise to the
petition for a net operating income (“NOI”) adjustment in sufficient detail
that if established, such facts would demonstrate the existence of a decrease
in the NOI warranting such NOI adjustment. Within 30 working days after the
petition has been submitted to the City Manager for filing, the petitioner
shall be given notice of the time and place of the hearing, which notice,
together with a copy of the petition, shall be served upon or mailed to each
tenant of a rental space which would be affected by the NOI adjustment if
granted. When a declaration of service has been submitted to the City Manager,
the petition for an NOI adjustment shall be deemed filed.
      (3)   A park owner shall be entitled to an adjustment of the space rent
ceiling so as to enable the park owner’s net operating income (“NOI”) for the
subsequent year to be increased by a rate which, when added to the maximum
permissible adjustment provided for above, will give the park owner a just and
reasonable return on park property.
   (C)   Special assessment based on capital improvements.
      (1)   An application for a special assessment based on the cost of a
completed capital improvement may be filed with the City Manager pursuant to
this division (C). For the purposes of this division (C), CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT
is defined as the installation of new improvements and facilities and/or the
replacement or reconstruction of existing improvements and facilities which
consist of more than ordinary maintenance or repairs, with a useful life of at
least five years, and have been agreed upon between the park owner; the
resident committee, if any; and approved by more than 50% of the owners of all
mobile homes located within the park in an election called to consider the
matter with each space casting one vote.
      (2)   A special assessment may be granted at the discretion of the
hearing officer considering all circumstances without approval of the
homeowners if the capital improvement is necessary to protect the health and
safety of the residents of the park, or to comply with governmental laws or
regulations.
      (3)   Capital improvement assessments shall be amortized over the useful
life of the improvement as set forth in Internal Revenue Service “class life”
tables then in effect, unless the hearing officer, in his or her discretion,
determines that the use of such tables is unreasonable under the circumstances.
      (4)   In addition to the cost of the improvements(s), the assessment
shall include interest at 2% over the prime rate at Bank of America in effect
at the time the assessment is approved calculated annually on the unamortized
cost of improvement.
      (5)   Capital improvement assessments shall be apportioned equally among
all spaces in the mobile home park and shall be payable monthly, and shall be
set forth by the park owner as a separate item from the space rent. The
assessment shall remain in effect until the cost of the improvement, plus
interest as set forth herein, has been fully recovered.
   (D)   Effective. No annual adjustment shall become effective if the previous
annual adjustment became effective within the previous 12 months unless
approved by the hearing officer pursuant to division (B) above.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-944, passed 6-8-1995; Ord. MC-1481,
passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.105 REQUIRED CERTIFICATION ON RENTAL ADJUSTMENT NOTICE.
   The hearing officer shall have the right to deny any rent adjustments under
this chapter if the owner:
   (A)   Has failed to comply with any provisions of this chapter and/or
regulations issued thereunder by the City Manager or the Mayor and City Council
or any other federal, state or city law, ordinance or regulation concerning
mobile home parks; and
   (B)   Has failed to comply substantially with any applicable state or local
housing, health or safety law.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.110 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   The City Manager shall administer and carry out to the fullest extent
possible the expressed intent and purposes of this chapter.
   (B)   The City Manager shall have the following
duties, responsibilities and functions, together with all powers reasonably
incidental thereto.
      (1)   Adoption of rules and regulations. Subject to the approval of the
Mayor and City Council the City Manager may make and adopt her or his or her
own administrative rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the
purposes and policies of this chapter and to enable the City Manager to carry
out his or her powers and duties thereunder, so long as such rules and
regulations are consistent with the laws of the state, this chapter and any
guidelines adopted by the Mayor and City Council. Any such rules and
regulations shall be reduced to writing and be on file with the City Manager at
all times.
      (2)   Maintenance of records. The City Manager shall keep a record of the
hearing proceedings, which shall be open for inspection by any member of the
public.
      (3)   Conduct studies and investigations. The City Manager shall have the
power to make such studies, surveys and investigations, and obtain such
information as is necessary to carry out her or his or her powers and duties.
      (4)   Require registration. The City Manager shall require such
registration of mobile home parks as the City Manager may deem necessary to
carry out his or her duties.
      (5)   Evaluation. The City Manager shall render at least semi-annually a
comprehensive written report to the Mayor and City Council concerning the
activities, holdings, actions, results of hearings and all other matters
pertinent to this chapter.
      (6)   Related duties. The City Manager shall undertake such other related
duties as may be assigned by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1021, passed 5-5-1998; Ord. MC-1481,
passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.120 PETITION BY TENANT.
   (A)   Any tenant of a mobile home rental space affected by this chapter,
upon payment of such filing fee as shall be duly established, may petition the
city for a determination whether a proposed or actual action by the landlord of
such tenant is legal, valid and within the terms of this chapter. If the City
Manager shall establish forms for such petitions, the petition shall be
prepared and submitted upon such form. In the absence of such designated form,
the petition shall contain the name, address and telephone number, if known, of
the landlord, owner, manager or other person authorized to represent the owner
of the mobile home park, a brief statement of the facts giving rise to the
request for interpretation or determination and a statement that a copy of the
petition has been personally served or mailed to the owner, manager or other
person authorized to accept and receive notices to the landlord.
   (B)   In the event that a petition by tenant(s) results in a downward
adjustment in the space rent, the park owner shall not be obligated to adjust
any rent except the rent of those tenant(s) who signed the petition and paid
the established filing fee.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.130 PETITION BY LANDLORD.
   Any landlord of a mobile home park affected by this chapter may, upon
payment of such filing fee as shall be duly established, petition the city for
a determination whether a particular course of action by said landlord is
allowable, valid and in conformity with this chapter. The City Manager may
designate forms for the filing of such petitions. In the event that no such
form has been designated, the petition shall be in writing, and shall contain
the name, address and telephone number, if any, of the person requesting the
interpretation or opinion; the name and address of each tenant of a rental unit
owned or managed by the person requesting the interpretation or opinion, if it
is intended that such interpretation or opinion affects such rental unit; a
brief statement of the facts giving rise to the request for interpretation or
opinion; and a statement that a copy of such petition has been personally
served upon or mailed to each such tenant who might be affected thereby.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.140 CONDUCT OF PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council shall appoint a hearing officer to hear
matters pertaining to this chapter.
   (B)   Each party to a hearing may have assistance in presenting evidence or
in setting forth by argument his or her position, from an attorney or such
other person as may be designated by said party.
   (C)   Formal rules of evidence shall not apply in proceedings; however, all
oral testimony offered as evidence shall be under oath.
   (D)   In the event that any party shall fail to appear at the time and place
set for hearing of a petition, the hearing officer may hear and review such
evidence as may be presented, and may make such findings and decisions as shall
be supported by the evidence presented.
   (E)   The hearing officer shall base his or her decision on evidence
presented at the hearing and may consider any evidence resulting from
independent investigations of the City Manager pursuant to §
8.90.110(B)(5), where such evidence has been disclosed to the parties.
   (F)   (1)   The hearing officer shall make findings based on the evidence as
to each fact relevant to the hearing officer’s decision on the petition.
      (2)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be based upon the
findings, and shall:
         (a)   Determine whether the action or proposed action of a landlord is
valid, permitted and in conformity with this chapter; and/or
         (b)   Determine whether an adjustment is necessary, and if so, the
nature and amount of relief to be granted or authorized to the landlord or
homeowner.
   (G)   The hearing officer shall consider the evidence and arguments of the
parties no later than 30 days after the matter has been submitted for decision
and the hearing officer shall make her or his final decision at the conclusion
of their deliberations. No rent adjustment will be authorized unless supported
by the evidence. A notice of the hearing officer’s decision shall be sent to
each party to a proceeding. Unless good cause to the contrary shall appear,
each decision of the hearing officer shall apply on a space by space basis,
taking into account the possibility of differences in base rent, services
provided and other facts differentiating rental spaces.
   (H)   Nothing in this chapter, or in any decision of the hearing officer,
shall require any landlord to raise rents or charges to tenants. If an
adjustment in the maximum permissible rent is authorized, a landlord may raise
rents or charges by a lesser amount, or for a lesser time than is authorized by
the decision of the hearing officer.
   (I)   The findings and decisions of the hearing officer shall be a final
administrative action. There shall be no right of appeal to the Mayor and City
Council. Such findings and decisions shall be public records, and may be
certified by the City Clerk. Each decision shall set forth a notice as required
by Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, § 1094.6. The decision shall become effective
upon mailing to the party unless otherwise indicated at the hearing. This
section supersedes Chapter 2.64.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.150 PRIORITIES.
   All petitions for hearings shall be heard in order of date filed.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.160 RENT ADJUSTMENT REGULATIONS.
   For purposes of determining allowable rent adjustments, the rules and
regulations set forth in this section shall be used. In authorizing individual
adjustments of the rent ceilings, the hearing officer shall consider the
purposes of this chapter and the requirements of law. The hearing officer may
consider all relevant factors including: increases or decreases in operating
and maintenance expenses; the extent and cost of utilities paid by the owner;
necessary and reasonable capital improvements of the park as distinguished from
normal repair, replacement and maintenance; increases or decreases in
amenities, equipment, insurance or services; substantial deterioration of the
park other than as a result of ordinary wear and tear; failure on the part of
the owner to provide adequate repair; housing services or failure on the part
of the owner to comply with applicable Housing, Health and Safety Codes;
federal and state income tax benefits; the speculative nature of the
investment; whether or not the property is acquired or is held as a long-term
or short-term investment; the owner’s rate of return on investment; the owner’s
current and base year net operating income; and any other factors deemed
relevant by the hearing officer in providing the owner a fair return. A sale of
a mobile home park by the owner, subsequent to June 3, 1991, which results in a
Proposition 13 tax increase, cannot be a factor to be considered in a request
for a rent adjustment by the new owners.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.170 NET OPERATING INCOME.
   Net operating income (“NOI”) shall be gross income less allowable operating
expenses.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.180 GROSS INCOME.
   Gross income equals:
   (A)   Gross rents, computed as gross rental income at 100% paid occupancy;
   (B)   Plus interest from rental deposits, unless directly paid by the
landlord to the tenants;
   (C)   Plus income from miscellaneous sources, including, but not limited to,
laundry facilities, vending machines, amusement devices, cleaning fees or
services, garage and parking fees;
   (D)   Plus all other income or consideration received or receivable for or
in connection with the use or occupancy of rental units; and
   (E)   Minus uncollected rents due to vacancy and bad debts to the extent
that the same are beyond the landlord’s control.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.190 ALLOWABLE OPERATING EXPENSES.
   Operating expenses shall include the following:
   (A)   Real property taxes;
   (B)   Utility costs;
   (C)   Management fees actually paid if management services are contracted
for. If all or a portion of management services are performed by the landlord,
management fees shall include the reasonable value for such landlord performed
services. Management fees greater than 5% of gross income are presumed to be
unreasonable. Such presumption may be rebutted;
   (D)   Other reasonable management expenses, including, but not limited to,
necessary and reasonable advertising, accounting and insurance;
   (E)   Normal repair and maintenance expenses, including, but not limited to,
painting, normal cleaning, fumigation, landscaping and repair of all standard
services, including electrical, plumbing, carpentry, furnished appliances,
drapes, carpets and furniture;
   (F)   Owner-performed labor, which shall be compensated at the following
hourly rates upon documentation of the date, time and nature of the work
performed:
      (1)   At the general prevailing rate of per diem wages for the San
Bernardino area, for the specific type of work performed, as determined and
published by the Director of the State Department of Industrial Relations
pursuant to the Cal. Labor Code, §§ 1770 et seq.; and
      (2)   If no such general prevailing rate has been determined and
published, then a cost per hour for general maintenance and a cost per hour for
skilled labor as established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
Notwithstanding the above, a landlord may receive greater or lesser
compensation for self-labor if the landlord proves by clear and convincing
evidence that the amounts set forth above are substantially unfair in a given
case. Owner performed labor in excess of 5% of gross income shall not be
allowed unless the landlord proves, by clear and convincing evidence, that such
excess labor expenses resulted in proportionately greater services for the
benefit of tenants.
   (G)   License and registration fees required by law to the extent same are
not otherwise paid by tenants;
   (H)   The yearly amortized portion of capital expenses, including financing
costs, computed in accordance with any useful life table utilized by the
Internal Revenue Service; and
   (I)   Reasonable attorney’s fees and costs incurred as normal and reasonable
costs of doing business, including, but not limited to, good faith attempts to
recover rents owing and good faith unlawful detainer actions not in derogation
of applicable law, to the extent same are not recovered from tenants.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.200 OPERATING EXPENSES NOT ALLOWABLE.
   Operating expenses shall not include the following:
   (A)   Avoidable and unreasonable or unnecessary expenses;
   (B)   Mortgage principal and interest payments;
   (C)   Lease purchase payments and rent or lease payments to landlord’s
lessor;
   (D)   Penalties, fees or interest assessed or awarded for violation of this
or any other statute;
   (E)   Attorney’s fees and other costs incurred for proceedings before the
hearing officer or in preparation for such proceedings, or in connection with
any civil actions or proceedings against the city, or a decision, ruling or
order of the hearing officer;
   (F)   Depreciation of the real property; and
   (G)   Any expenses for which the landlord has been reimbursed by any
security deposit, insurance settlement, judgment for damages, settlement or any
other method.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.210 PRESUMPTION OF FAIR BASE YEAR NET OPERATING INCOME.
   Except as provided in §
8.90.220, it shall be presumed that the net operating income produced by a park
owner during the base year, provided a fair return on property. Owners shall be
entitled to maintain and increase their net operating income from year to year
in accordance with §§
8.90.080 and 8.90.100(B).
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.220 REBUTTING THE PRESUMPTION.
   (A)   It may be determined that the base year net operating income yielded
other than a fair return on property, in which case, the base year net
operating income may be adjusted accordingly.
   (B)   In order to make such a determination, the hearing officer must make
at least one of the following findings.
      (1)   (a)   The owner’s operating and maintenance expenses in the base
year were unusually
high or low in comparison to other years. In such instances, adjustments may be
made in calculating such expenses so the base year operating expenses reflect
average expenses for the property over a reasonable period of time.
         (b)   The hearing officer shall consider the following factors:
            1.   The owners made substantial capital improvements during 1988
which were not reflected in the rent levels on the base date;
            2.   Substantial repairs were made due to damage caused by natural
disaster or vandalism which management has taken appropriate action to reduce;
            3.   Maintenance and repair were below accepted standards so as to
cause significant deterioration in the quality of housing services; and
            4.   Other expenses were unreasonably high or low notwithstanding
the following of prudent business measures.
      (2)   The rental rates on the base date were disproportionate due to
enumerated factors below. In such instances, adjustments may be made in
calculating gross rents consistent with the purpose of this chapter.
         (a)   The rental rates on the base date were substantially higher or
lower than in preceding months by reason of premiums being charged or rebates
being given for reasons unique to particular units or limited to the period
determining the base rent.
         (b)   The rent on the base date was substantially higher or lower than
at other times of the year by reason of seasonal demand or seasonal variations
in rent.
         (c)   The rental rates on the base date were exceptionally high or low
due to other factors which would cause the application of the base year net
operating income to result in gross inequity to either the owner or tenant.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.230 DETERMINATION OF BASE YEAR NET OPERATING INCOME.
   (A)   To determine the net operating income during the base year, there
shall be deducted from the annualized gross income being realized in 1988, a
sum equal to the actual operating expenses for calendar year 1988, unless the
owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the hearing officer that the use of
some other consecutive 12-month period is justified by reasons consistent with
the purposes of this section.
   (B)   In the event the owner did not own the subject property during the
base year, the operating expenses for 1988 shall be determined by one of the
following methods whichever the hearing officer determines to be more reliable
in the particular case:
      (1)   The previous owner’s actual operating expenses, as defined in §
8.90.190, if such figures were available; or
      (2)   Actual operating expenses for the first calendar year of ownership,
discounted to 1988 by the schedule.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.240 DETERMINATION OF CURRENT YEAR NET OPERATING INCOME.
   To determine the current year net operating income, there shall be deducted
from the annualized gross income, determined by analyzing the monthly rents in
effect at the time of filing of a petition, a sum equal to the actual operating
expenses for the last calendar year (unless the owner demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the hearing officer that the use of some other consecutive 12-
month period is justified by reasons consistent with the purposes of this
section).
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.250 SCHEDULE OF INCREASES IN OPERATING EXPENSES.
   Where scheduling of rental increases, or other calculations, requires
projections of income and expenses, it shall be assumed that operating
expenses, exclusive of property taxes and management expenses, increases at 5%
per year, that property taxes increase at 2% per year and that management
expenses constitute 5% of gross income; provided, however, that if actual
increases are greater or less than those listed in this section, the actual
increases shown according to proof shall be the increases applicable.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
 
§ 8.90.260 ALLOWABLE RENT ADJUSTMENTS.
   The hearing officer may permit rent adjustments, unless otherwise prescribed
by law, such that the owner’s net operating income will be adjusted at the rate
as specified in §
8.90.100(B)(2).
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.270 DISCRETIONARY CONSIDERATIONS.
   While the net operating income formula should operate to guarantee a park
owner a fair return on investment, the hearing officer considering a request
for rent increases shall consider all relevant factors presented in making a
determination, as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.280 LIMIT ON INCREASES PENDING HEARING OR LITIGATION.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no adjustment in rents
in a mobile home park shall be valid during the time that any hearing or
proceeding is being conducted pursuant to this chapter, nor shall such increase
be valid during the period in which the hearing officer’s decision for that
park is being reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction, except those the
tenants shall be required to pay as the permissible adjustment as provided for
under §
8.90.090(B).
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.290 RENT ADJUSTMENTS FOR REDUCTION IN SERVICES.
   (A)   No owner shall reduce the level or kind of services provided to
tenants as of the date of adoption of this chapter or take any other punitive
action in retaliation for the exercise by tenants of any of the rights granted
by this chapter.
   (B)   If a mobile home park provides in the rent, without separate charge,
utilities or similar services (including, but not limited to, natural gas,
electricity, water, sewer, trash and cable television) and converts to separate
charge for such service by separate metering, separate charge or other lawful
means of transferring to the tenant the obligation for payment for such
services, the cost savings shall be passed through to tenants by a rent
adjustment equal to the actual cost to the park of such transferred utility or
similar service (less common area usage, based on costs for the 12-month period
prior to notice to the tenants of the change). Provided compliance with this
section occurs, provisions for mediation and/or hearing shall not apply. It is
the intent of this section for those rental agreements entered into on or after
January 1, 1991 to be consistent with the provisions of Cal. Civil Code, §
798.41, as adopted by Chapter 1013, § 2 of the Statutes of 1990.
   (C)   For purposes of division (A) above, in determining cost savings to be
passed on to tenants in the form of decreased rent, the cost of installation of
separate utility meters or similar costs incurred by the owner to shift the
obligation for payment of utility costs to the tenants shall not be considered.
However, this shall not be construed to prohibit or prevent the consideration
of inclusion of such costs as an increased operating expense at mediation or
arbitration.
   (D)   If a service other than a utility or similar service per division (A)
above is reduced or eliminated, or if a utility or similar service is reduced
or eliminated without a concomitant decrease in rent, the provisions of this
chapter regarding petition and/or hearing shall apply subject to the following
conditions. Any petition initiating mediation or hearing must be filed within
12 months of the date on which the service was reduced or eliminated, and the
reduction or elimination in services must continue to exist at the time of the
hearing. Rent adjustments shall only be granted prospectively.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.300 QUANTUM OF PROOF AND BURDEN OF PROOF.
   The decision of the hearing officer must be supported by the evidence
submitted at the hearing. The petitioning party shall have the burden of proof
in such proceedings.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.310 HEARING OFFICER DECISION FINAL.
   The decision of the hearing officer is final. This section specifically
supersedes
Chapter 2.64.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.320 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   An owner or tenant aggrieved by any action of the hearing officer may seek
judicial review by appealing to the appropriate court within the jurisdiction.
Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, §§ 1094.5 and 1094.6 are applicable.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.330 TERMINATION OF TENANCY.
   A tenancy which is not held pursuant to a written rental agreement that
conforms to the provisions of the Cal. Civil Code, §§ 798.15 et seq. shall be
terminated only pursuant to the Cal. Civil Code, §§ 798.55 et seq.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.340 REMEDIES FOR VIOLATION.
   (A)   Civil remedies. Any person who demands, accepts or retains any payment
in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be liable in a civil action
to the person from whom such payment is demanded, accepted or retained for
damages in the sum of three times the amount by which the payment or payments
demanded, accepted or retained exceed the maximum rent which could lawfully be
demanded, accepted or retained, together with reasonable attorneys’ fees and
costs as determined by the court.
   (B)   Criminal remedies. It shall be unlawful for an owner to adjust any
rent in an amount in excess of that allowed under this chapter or by order of
the hearing officer. Any owner who willfully and knowingly violates any of the
provisions of this chapter or the orders of the hearing officer shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Injunctive and other civil relief. The City Manager, the city and the
tenants and owners may seek relief from the appropriate court in the
jurisdiction within which the rental unit is located to enforce any provision
of this chapter or its implementing regulations or to restrain or enjoin any
violation of this chapter and of the rules, regulations, orders and decisions
of the hearing officer.
   (D)   Non-waiver of rights. Any waiver or purported waiver by a tenant of
rights granted under this chapter prior to the time when such rights may be
exercised, whether oral or written, shall be void as contrary to public policy.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.350 PERIODIC REVIEW OF CHAPTER.
   The Mayor and City Council shall review the provisions of the chapter at any
other time deemed appropriate, in order to consider the following:
   (A)   Whether this chapter continues to be necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare;
   (B)   Whether the implementation of the provisions of this chapter have been
adequate; and
   (C)   Whether the provisions of this chapter should be amended to provide
more effective regulations or to avoid unnecessary hardship.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.360 CHAPTER TO BE LIBERALLY CONSTRUED.
   This chapter shall be liberally construed to achieve the purposes of this
chapter and to preserve its validity.
(Ord. MC-865, passed 3-24-1993; Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.370 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Deleted by Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.380 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Deleted by Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.390 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Deleted by Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.400 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Deleted by Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.410 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Deleted by Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.420 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Deleted by Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
§ 8.90.430 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Deleted by Ord. MC-1481, passed 4-14-2018)
CHAPTER 8.93: BICYCLES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PUBLIC BUILDINGS
Section
   
8.93.010   Prohibition
   
8.93.020   Exceptions
   
8.93.030   Violation
§ 8.93.010 PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful to bring a bicycle or bicycles into the City Hall or
the second or third floors of the City Hall annex.
(Ord. MC-951, passed 11-8-1995)
§ 8.93.020 EXCEPTIONS.
   Section
8.93.010 shall not apply to police officers or to those who have received the
prior written permission of the City Facilities Manager.
(Ord. MC-951, passed 11-8-1995)
§ 8.93.030 VIOLATION.
   Violation of §
8.93.010 shall be either a misdemeanor or an infraction.
(Ord. MC-951, passed 11-8-1995)
CHAPTER 8.95: ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN CITY BUILDINGS
Section
   
8.95.010   Prohibition
   
8.95.020   Exceptions
   
8.95.030   Penalty
§ 8.95.010 PROHIBITION.
   All animals, whether domestic or otherwise and whether dead or alive, are
prohibited from being bought, carried or otherwise allowed entry into any
building belonging to or operated by the city.
(Ord. MC-795, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 8.95.020 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The prohibition of §
8.95.010 shall not apply to animals trained and certified to assist the blind
and deaf or any animals used by a law enforcement agency.
   (B)   Prohibition of §
8.95.010 shall not apply to the animal shelter owned or operated by the city.
(Ord. MC-795, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 8.95.030 PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. MC-795, passed 6-18-1991)
CHAPTER 8.97: SMOKING CANNABIS IN PUBLIC PLACES
Section
   
8.97.010   Purpose and intent
   
8.97.020   Applicability
   
8.97.030   Definitions
   
8.97.040   Prohibition of smoking and inhaling in enclosed places
   
8.97.050   Prohibition of smoking and inhaling in unenclosed areas
   
8.97.060   Prohibition of smoking and inhaling in city vehicles and on city
campuses
   
8.97.070   Smoking distance required
   
8.97.080   Additional smoking-related restrictions
   
8.97.090   Other requirements and prohibitions
   
8.97.100   Posting of signs
   
8.97.110   Interpretation
   
8.97.120   Other laws
   
8.97.130   Violations declared a public nuisance
   
8.97.140   Each violation a separate offense
   
8.97.150   Criminal penalties
   
8.97.160   Remedies cumulative and not exclusive
§ 8.97.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the good health and well-being of
the residents of the city from the documented negative effects of secondhand
cannabis smoke. Smoke-free air is an important component of a healthy
community. The Mayor and City Council intend to protect the public health,
safety and welfare by providing a secondhand cannabis smoke-free environment in
public and private places where non-cannabis smokers may be exposed to
secondhand cannabis smoke. The Mayor and City Council further intend to promote
secondhand cannabis smoke-free air, recognizing the need to breathe smoke-free
air has a priority over the desire to smoke cannabis. This chapter is not
intended to interfere with a patient’s right to use medicinal cannabis pursuant
to state law, as may be amended, nor does it criminalize cannabis possession or
use otherwise authorized by state law.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.97.020 APPLICABILITY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to allow any conduct or activity
relating to the cultivation, distribution, dispensing, sale or consumption of
cannabis that is otherwise illegal under local or state law. No provision of
this title shall be deemed a defense or immunity to any action brought against
any person by the County District Attorney’s office, the Attorney General of
the state or the United States. This chapter shall be applicable in the
incorporated areas of the city and in all city buildings, whether owned, leased
or controlled by the city, and on all city campuses.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.97.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company,
joint venture, corporation, association or other entity formed for profit-
making purposes or for non-profit charitable, religious, philanthropic,
educational, political, social or similar purposes. A government agency is not
a BUSINESS within the meaning of this chapter.
   CANNABIS. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica
or Cannabis ruderalis, or any other strain or varietal of the genus CANNABIS
that may exist or be discovered or developed that has psychoactive or medical
properties, whether growing or not, including, but not limited to, the seeds
thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the
plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. CANNABIS also means the separated
resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from CANNABIS. CANNABIS also means
cannabis, as defined by Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11018 and Cal. Business
and Professions Code, § 26001(f), as both may be amended from time to time. Any
reference to CANNABIS or CANNABIS PRODUCTS shall include medical and non-
medical cannabis and medical and non-medical cannabis products unless otherwise
specified. CANNABIS or CANNABIS PRODUCT does not mean industrial hemp, as
defined by Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11018.5, or the weight of any other
ingredient combined with CANNABIS to prepare topical or oral administrations,
food, drink or other product. CANNABIS does not include the mature stalks of
the plant; fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of
the plant; any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber,
oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination.
   CANNABIS CONCENTRATE. Cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate
one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product’s potency.
Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate for
purposes of this chapter. A CANNABIS CONCENTRATE is not considered food, as
defined by the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 109935, or drug, as defined by
the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 109925.
   CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA. Any item designed for the consumption, use or
preparation of cannabis or cannabis product.
   CANNABIS PRODUCT.
      (1)   (a)   Any product containing, made or derived from cannabis or
cannabis products that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked,
heated, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed or ingested by any other
means, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, bongs, blunts, pipes;
and
         (b)   Any electronic smoking device.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any provision of divisions (1)(a) and (1)(b) to the
contrary, CANNABIS PRODUCTS includes any component, part or accessory of a
cannabis product, whether or not sold separately.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino, a charter city in the State of California.
   CITY CAMPUS. Enclosed areas and unenclosed areas under the legal control of
the city, including property that is owned, leased or maintained by the city or
governed by the Mayor and City Council.
   DINING AREA. Any area which is available to or customarily used by the
general public or an employee and which is designed, established or regularly
used for consuming food or drink.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. An electronic device that can be used to deliver
an inhaled dose of cannabis, cannabis oils or other substances, including any
component, part or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE includes any such device, whether manufactured,
distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar,
an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, vaping pens
or any other product name or descriptor.
   EMPLOYEE. Any natural person who is employed or retained as an independent
contractor by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary
wages or profit, or any natural person who volunteers his or her services for
an employer.
   EMPLOYER. Any business with one or more employees.
   ENCLOSED AREA. An area in which outside air cannot circulate freely to all
parts of the area, and includes an area that has:
      (1)   Any type of overhead cover and at least three walls or other
vertical constraint to airflow; or
      (2)   Four walls or other vertical constraints to airflow.
   PERSON. Any natural person, business, personal representative, receiver,
trustee, assignee or any other legal entity.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any area under the legal or de facto control of an
employer that an employee or the general public may have cause to enter in the
normal course of operations, regardless of the hours of operation.
   PROHIBITED SMOKING AREA. A designated portion of an unenclosed area where
cannabis smoking is prohibited. Cannabis smoking shall be prohibited within
1,000 feet of any of the following:
      (1)   Any school (k-12) regardless if it is a public, private or charter
school;
      (2)   Daycare center, as defined in the Cal. Health and Safety Code, §
1596.76;
      (3)   Youth center, as defined in the Cal. Health and Safety Code, §
11353.1;
      (4)   Any library, park, bicycle paths or area in which the primary
purpose is used for minors; and
      (5)   Any alcohol rehabilitation center or substance abuse facility.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place, publicly or privately owned, when being used for a
public event, including, but not limited to, a farmers’ market, parade, craft
fair, festival or any other event open to the general public.
   RECREATIONAL AREA. Any area that is owned, controlled or used by the city
and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee
or age requirement. RECREATIONAL AREA includes, but is not limited to, parks,
picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, walking paths, gardens, hiking
trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming pools, skateboard parks and
amusement parks. RECREATIONAL AREA does not include golf courses.
   SERVICE AREA. Any publicly or privately owned area designed to be used or is
regularly used by one or more persons to receive a service, wait to receive a
service or to make a transaction, whether or not such service or transaction
includes the exchange of money. SERVICE AREA includes, but is not limited to,
areas including or adjacent to information kiosks, automatic teller machines,
ticket lines, bus stops or shelters, mobile vendor lines or cab stands.
   SMOKE. The gases, oils, particles or vapors released into the air as a
result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent or
usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human
inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting or vaporizing material
contains no tobacco, cannabis, cannabis oils or nicotine and the purpose of
inhalation is solely olfactory, such as SMOKE from incense. SMOKE includes, but
is not limited to, tobacco smoke, electronic smoking device vapors and cannabis
smoke.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any ignited, heated or
activated cigar, cigarette, cigarillo, pipe, hookah, electronic smoking device
or any plant product intended for human inhalation, including, but not limited
to, cannabis or cannabis products.
   UNENCLOSED AREA. Any area that is not an enclosed area.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.97.040 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING AND INHALING IN ENCLOSED PLACES.
   (A)   The city shall enforce the state Smoke-free Workplace Law (Cal. Labor
Code, § 6404.5), which prohibits smoking in enclosed places of employment, in
all areas subject to this chapter.
   (B)   In addition, all cannabis smoking and the inhaling of cannabis
products are prohibited in the enclosed areas of the following places:
      (1)   All businesses that are not places of employment and which have a
common or shared air space with an enclosed area, such as, without limitation,
openings, cracks, air ventilation systems, doorways, hallways and stairways, in
which smoking is prohibited by law. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, the fact that cannabis smoke enters one enclosed area from another
enclosed area is conclusive proof that the areas share a common or shared air
space;
      (2)   Public places, as defined in §
8.97.030; and
      (3)   Any area within 50 feet of any door, window, opening or vent into a
public place, dining area, service area or recreational area, except for such
areas on private residential property.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.97.050 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING AND INHALING IN UNENCLOSED AREAS.
   Smoking and inhaling of cannabis products are prohibited in the unenclosed
areas of the following places, as defined in §
8.97.030:
   (A)   Dining areas;
   (B)   Public places;
   (C)   Recreational areas;
   (D)   Service areas; and
   (E)   Places of employment.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.97.060 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING AND INHALING IN CITY VEHICLES AND ON CITY
CAMPUSES.
   (A)   Smoking and inhaling of cannabis products are prohibited in all
vehicles leased, owned or operated by the city or any district governed by the
city.
   (B)   Smoking and the use of cannabis or cannabis products are prohibited in
all enclosed areas and unenclosed areas of a city campus.
§ 8.97.070 SMOKING DISTANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Smoking and inhaling of cannabis in all unenclosed areas is prohibited
within 50 feet from any enclosed or unenclosed areas in which smoking is
prohibited.
   (B)   A private property or business owner may authorize a designated
smoking area in an unenclosed area of his or her private property.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.97.080 ADDITIONAL SMOKING-RELATED RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   A person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of
any place where cannabis smoking is prohibited by this chapter may not
knowingly or intentionally permit cannabis smoking in those places. For
purposes of this section, a person has acted knowingly or intentionally if the
person has not taken the following actions to prevent cannabis smoking by
another person:
      (1)   Requested that a person who is smoking refrain from cannabis
smoking in the prohibited place; and
      (2)   Requested that a person who is smoking cannabis leave the
prohibited place if the person refuses to stop smoking in the prohibited place
after being asked to stop. This section does not require physically ejecting a
person from a place or taking steps to prevent smoking under circumstances that
would involve risk of physical harm.
   (B)   No person shall intimidate, harass or otherwise retaliate against any
person who seeks compliance with this section. Moreover, no person shall
intentionally or recklessly expose another person to cannabis smoke in response
to that person’s effort to achieve compliance with this section.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.97.090 OTHER REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No employer or business doing business with the city and within the
city shall knowingly or intentionally permit cannabis smoking or inhaling in an
area which is under the employer’s or business’s control and in which cannabis
smoking is prohibited.
   (B)   No person shall litter or dispose of cannabis packaging or cannabis
products waste within the boundaries of an area in which cannabis smoking or
cannabis products is prohibited except into a waste receptacle or ash can.
   (C)   No person, employer or business shall intimidate or threaten or effect
any reprisal against another person for the purpose of retaliating against that
person for seeking to obtain compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.97.100 POSTING OF SIGNS.
   A person, employer or business that has legal or de facto control of an area
in which cannabis smoking, or the use of cannabis products is prohibited by
this chapter shall post a clear, conspicuous and unambiguous “no smoking and no
vaping” or “smoke-free” sign at each point of ingress to the area, and in at
least one other conspicuous point within the area. The signs will have letters
of no less than one inch in height and shall include the international “no
smoking and no vaping” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a
burning cigarette, cannabis leaf and e-cigarette enclosed in a red circle with
a red bar across it). Signs posted on the exterior of buildings to comply with
this section shall include the reasonable distance requirement set forth in §
8.97.070. At least one sign with a city phone number to be determined by the
Director of Community Development and Housing and made available on the
Department’s website which complaints can be directed must be placed
conspicuously in each place in which cannabis smoking is prohibited. The
Department of Community Development and Housing shall be responsible for
providing appropriate signs in public facilities controlled by the city.
Notwithstanding this section, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a
defense to a charge of cannabis smoking or the use of cannabis products in
violation of any other provision of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 8.97.110 INTERPRETATION.
   This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit cannabis
smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.97.120 OTHER LAWS.
   It is not the intention of this chapter to regulate any conduct where the
regulation of such conduct has been preempted by the state.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.97.130 VIOLATIONS DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter is deemed
unlawful and a public nuisance.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.97.140 EACH VIOLATION A SEPARATE OFFENSE.
   Each and every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures
authorized by the city.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.97.150 CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   Any person causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing a
violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and may, in the
discretion of the City Attorney, be prosecuted as a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment in the
city or county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. The City Attorney, in his or her sound discretion, may
prosecute a violation of this chapter as an infraction, rather than a
misdemeanor, or reduce or agree to the reduction of a previously filed
misdemeanor to an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction under the
provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100 for
the first violation, a fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation within
one year and a fine not exceeding $500 for a third and subsequent violations
within one year. A fourth violation of this chapter within one year shall be
charged as a misdemeanor and may not be reduced to an infraction.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.97.160 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE AND NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided herein are not to be construed as exclusive remedies.
The city is authorized to pursue any proceedings or remedies provided by law or
equity.
(Ord. MC-1465, passed 3-7-2018)
CHAPTER 8.99: PERSONAL CULTIVATION OF CANNABIS
Section
   
8.99.010   Purpose and intent
   
8.99.020   Applicability
   
8.99.030   Definitions
   
8.99.040   Personal cultivation of cannabis
   
8.99.050   Violations declared a public nuisance
   
8.99.060   Each violation a separate offense
   
8.99.070   Criminal penalties
   
8.99.080   Remedies cumulative and not exclusive
§ 8.99.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to impose reasonable regulatory restrictions
on the personal cultivation of cannabis pursuant to state law. This chapter is
not intended to interfere with a patient’s right to use medicinal cannabis
pursuant to state law, as may be amended, nor does it criminalize cannabis
possession or cultivation otherwise authorized by state law. This chapter is
not intended to give any person or entity independent legal authority to engage
in commercial cannabis activity, as it is intended simply to impose regulatory
restrictions regarding personal cultivation of cannabis in the city pursuant to
this code and state law.
(Ord. MC-1466, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.99.020 APPLICABILITY.
   Nothing in this title shall be construed to allow any conduct or activity
relating to the cultivation, distribution, dispensing, sale or consumption of
cannabis that is otherwise illegal under local or state law. Nor shall it be
construed to exempt any activity related to the cultivation of cannabis from
any applicable electrical, plumbing, land use or other building or land use
standards or permitting requirements. No provision of this chapter shall be
deemed a defense or immunity to any action brought against any person by the
County District Attorney’s office, the Attorney General of the state or the
United States.
(Ord. MC-1466, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.99.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino, California.
   CANNABIS. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica
or Cannabis ruderalis, or any other strain or varietal of the genus Cannabis
that may exist or be discovered, or developed, that has psychoactive or medical
properties, whether growing or not, including, but not limited to, the seeds
thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the
plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. CANNABIS also means the separated
resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from CANNABIS. CANNABIS also means
cannabis, as defined by Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11018 and Cal. Business
and Professions Code, § 26001(f), as both may be amended from time to time. Any
reference to CANNABIS or CANNABIS PRODUCTS shall include medical and non-
medical cannabis and medical and non-medical cannabis products unless otherwise
specified. CANNABIS or CANNABIS PRODUCT does not mean industrial hemp, as
defined by Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11018.5, or the weight of any other
ingredient combined with cannabis to prepare topical or oral administrations,
food, drink or other product. CANNABIS does not include the mature stalks of
the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of
the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber,
oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination.
   CANNABIS CONCENTRATE. Manufactured cannabis that has undergone a process to
concentrate the cannabinoid active ingredient, thereby increasing the product’s
potency.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading or trimming of cannabis, including
nurseries.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY. Includes the cultivation, possession,
manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling,
transportation, distribution or sale of cannabis and cannabis products.
   FULLY ENCLOSED AND SECURE STRUCTURE. Within a fully enclosed and secure
structure that complies with the California Building Code, as adopted in the
City of San Bernardino, or, if exempt from permit requirements, that has a
complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extended from the ground
to the roof, a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor is
secured by bolts or similar attachments; is secure against unauthorized entry;
and is accessible only through one or more lockable doors and accessible only
to the owner or tenant. Walls and roofs must be constructed of solid materials
that cannot be easily broken through such as two inches by four inch or thicker
studs overlaid with three-eighths-inch or thicker plywood or the equivalent.
Plastic sheeting, regardless of gauge, or similar products do not satisfy this
requirement. If indoor grow lights or air filtration systems are used, they
must comply with the California Building, Electrical and Fire Codes as adopted
by the City of San Bernardino.
   INDOOR CANNABIS CULTIVATION. Cultivation of cannabis using exclusively
artificial lighting.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS or MEDICINAL CANNABIS. Cannabis that is intended to be used
for medical cannabis purposes in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act of
1966 (“CUA,” Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§ 11362.5 et seq.); the Medical
Marijuana Program Act (“MMPA,” Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§ 11362.7 et
seq.); and the Medicinal Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act
(“MAUCRSA,” the Cal. Business and Professions Code, Division 10).
   MIXED-LIGHT CANNABIS CULTIVATION. Cultivation of cannabis using any
combination of natural and supplemental artificial lighting. Greenhouses, hoop
houses, hot houses and similar structures, or light deprivation systems, are
included in this category.
   OUTDOOR CANNABIS CULTIVATION. Cultivation of cannabis in the open air using
no artificial lighting conducted in the ground or in containers outdoors with
no covering. OUTDOOR CULTIVATION does not include greenhouses, hoop houses, hot
houses or similar structures.
   PERSONAL CULTIVATION. Cannabis cultivation conducted by an individual
strictly for that individual’s personal use, possession, processing,
transporting or giving away without any compensation whatsoever in accordance
with this code and state law, including, but not limited to, Cal. Health and
Safety Code, §§ 11362.1 and 11362.2, as may be amended. PERSONAL CULTIVATION
also means and includes cultivation of medical cannabis conducted by a
qualified patient exclusively for his or her personal medical use, and
cultivation conducted by a primary caregiver for the personal medical purposes
of no more than five specified qualified patients for whom he or she is the
primary caregiver, in accordance with state law, including Cal. Health and
Safety Code, §§ 11362.7 and 11362.765, as may be amended. Except as herein
defined, PERSONAL CULTIVATION does not include, and shall not authorize, any
cultivation conducted as part of a business or commercial activity, including
cultivation for compensation or retail or wholesale sales of CANNABIS.
   PRIMARY CAREGIVER. Shall have the same meaning as set forth in Cal. Health
and Safety Code, § 11362.7, as the same may be amended from time to time.
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE or RESIDENCE. A house, apartment unit, mobile home or
other similar dwelling which is permitted by the city.
   QUALIFYING PATIENT or QUALIFIED PATIENT. Shall have the same meaning as set
forth in Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11362.7, as the same may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. MC-1466, passed 3-7-2018)
Cross-reference:
   Building Codes, see Title 15,
Chapters 15.04 and
15.05
§ 8.99.040 PERSONAL CULTIVATION OF CANNABIS.
   (A)   Indoor cannabis cultivation and mixed-light cannabis cultivation for
personal use is permitted within all private residential dwellings and
accessory structures to all private residential dwellings within all zoning
districts, subject to all of the following minimum standards.
      (1)   All indoor cannabis cultivation and mixed-light cannabis
cultivation for personal use, including by a qualified patient or primary
caregiver, shall occur in a private residential dwelling or accessory structure
to a private residential dwelling, as those terms are defined in Chapter 19.02.
      (2)   No more than six cannabis plants may be cultivated by either a
qualified patient, primary caregiver or an individual over 21 years old at each
private residential dwelling or accessory structure regardless of the number of
qualified patients or adults 21 and older who reside at such private
residential dwelling. Cultivation of more than six plants per residential
dwelling or accessory structure shall be considered commercial cannabis
activity, not personal cultivation and shall be subject to all the requirements
for commercial cannabis activity within this code.
      (3)   Medical cannabis shall only be cultivated by:
         (a)   A qualified patient exclusively for his or her own personal
medical use but who does not provide, donate, sell or distribute medical
cannabis to any other person and who can provide a written doctor’s
recommendation to the city upon request; or
         (b)   A primary caregiver who cultivates, possesses, stores,
manufactures, transports, donates or provides medical cannabis exclusively for
the personal medical purposes of no more than five specified qualified patients
for whom he or she is the primary caregiver, but who does not receive
remuneration for these activities except for compensation in full compliance
with Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11362.765(c).
      (4)   For persons other than qualified patients or primary caregivers,
all personal cultivation shall be conducted by persons 21 years of age or six
cannabis plants, regardless of the number of persons residing at the private
residential dwelling.
      (5)   Written consent from all owners of the property to cultivate
cannabis within the residential dwelling or in a fully enclosed and secure
accessory structure shall be obtained and shall be kept on the property, and
available for inspection by the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, upon
request. The written consent shall only be valid for 12 months from the signing
of the consent.
      (6)   Cannabis cultivation of medical and non-medical cannabis for
personal use may occur inside a private residential dwelling and/or an
accessory building or structure on the same parcel, subject to the following
restrictions.
         (a)   Structures and equipment used for indoor cannabis cultivation
and/or mixed-light cannabis cultivation, such as indoor grow lights, shall
comply with all applicable Zoning, Building, Electrical and Fire Code
regulations, as adopted by the city.
         (b)   All accessory buildings and structures used for indoor cannabis
cultivation and/or mixed-light cannabis cultivation shall comply with the
locational and other requirements set forth in Title 19.
         (c)   Personal cultivation of cannabis shall not interfere with the
primary occupancy of the building or structure, including regular use of
kitchen(s) or bathroom(s).
         (d)   The use of generators to power any cultivation equipment is
prohibited.
         (e)   All property improvements, if any, shall comply with the
California Building, Electrical and Fire Codes, as adopted by the city.
         (f)   Any fully enclosed and secure structure or residence used for
cannabis cultivation shall have a ventilation and filtration system installed
that shall prevent cannabis plant odors from exiting the interior of the
structure and that shall comply with the Building Code adopted by the city.
         (g)   No exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation occurring at the
property shall be discernable from the public right-of-way.
         (h)   Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed,
to preclude any landlord from limiting or prohibiting personal cultivation of
cannabis by tenants.
         (i)   Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed,
to authorize commercial cultivation of cannabis.
         (j)   Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed,
to authorize any public or private nuisance as specified in this code.
         (k)   The cultivation area shall be in a locked space inaccessible to
minors, visitors, vandals or anyone not authorized to possess cannabis.
      (7)   The area of cultivation shall not adversely affect the health or
safety of the occupants of the private residence or the parcel or any other
property by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odor, smoke,
traffic, vibration, mold or other impacts, and shall not be maintained as to
constitute a hazard due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or
wastes.
      (8)   Cultivation shall not occur within any private residential dwelling
containing a daycare center, as defined in
Chapter 5.10.
   (B)   Outdoor cannabis cultivation (i.e., in the open air) is prohibited
within all zoning districts.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in personal cultivation
without registering with the city. The registration shall require the person
engaging in personal cultivation to provide his or her name, address, telephone
number and any other information determined necessary to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the residents and businesses of the city by the City
Manager, or his or her designee. The registration may require the payment of a
fee as set by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-1466, passed 3-7-2018)
Cross-reference:
   Building Codes, see Title 15,
Chapters 15.04 and
15.05
§ 8.99.050 VIOLATIONS DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter is deemed
unlawful and a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the City Manager,
Chief of Police or designee of either of them. The city may recover any
nuisance abatement costs and/or administrative fines relating to such
violations in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 38773.1 and 38773.5 in
accordance with Chapter 8.30.
(Ord. MC-1466, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.99.060 EACH VIOLATION A SEPARATE OFFENSE.
   Each and every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures
authorized by the city. Additionally, as a nuisance per se, any violation of
this chapter shall be subject to injunctive relief, disgorgement and payment to
the city for any monies unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement, costs of
investigation, attorneys’ fees and any other relief or remedy available at law
or in equity.
(Ord. MC-1466, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.99.070 CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   Any person causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing a
violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and may, in the
discretion of the City Attorney, be prosecuted as a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment in the
city or county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense. The City Attorney, in his or her
sound discretion, may prosecute a violation of this chapter as an infraction,
rather than a misdemeanor, or reduce or agree to the reduction of a previously
filed misdemeanor to an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction under
the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100
for the first violation, a fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation
within one year and a fine not exceeding $500 for a third violation within one
year. A fourth violation of this chapter within one year shall be charged as a
misdemeanor and may not be reduced to an infraction.
(Ord. MC-1466, passed 3-7-2018)
§ 8.99.080 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE AND NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided herein are not to be construed as exclusive remedies.
The city is authorized to pursue any proceedings or remedies provided by law.
(Ord. MC-1466, passed 3-7-2018)
TITLE 9: PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
   Chapter
ARTICLE I. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
      
9.04.   IMPROPER USE OF CITY INSIGNIA
      
9.08.   SOLICITING TORT CLAIMS
      
9.12.   DISTURBING CITY BUSINESS
      
9.16.   FALSE REPORTS
ARTICLE II. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
      
9.20.   LEG-HOLD TRAPS
ARTICLE III. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
      
9.28.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
      
9.32.   PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL
      
9.36.   RESERVED
      
9.40.   RESERVED
      
9.44.   GAMES OF CHANCE
ARTICLE IV. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
      
9.48.   SOUND-MAKING OR SOUND-AMPLIFYING DEVICES
      
9.49.   RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES - SHOPPING CENTERS
ARTICLE V. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
9.52.   TRESPASS
      
9.56.   MOTOR VEHICLE TRESPASS
      
9.58.   PRIVATE SURVEILLANCE EQUIPMENT
ARTICLE VI. CONSUMER PROTECTION
      
9.60.   PROHIBITION AGAINST CERTAIN FORMS OF AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION
      
9.62.   MEDIAN ISLAND SAFETY
      
9.64.   FAKE SALES
ARTICLE VII. OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
      
9.68.   CURFEW - MINORS
      
9.69.   DAYTIME LOITERING
      
9.70.   PROTECTION OF MINORS
ARTICLE VIII. WEAPONS
      
9.80.   CONCEALED WEAPONS
      
9.84.   PROJECTILES
      
9.90.   AUTHORITY TO ARREST - CITATIONS
      
9.92.   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PROCESS
      
9.93.   ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES
      
9.94.   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND APPEALS
ARTICLE IX. NARCOTICS AND GANGS
      
9.95.   NARCOTICS AND GANG-RELATED CRIME EVICTION PROGRAM
      
9.96.   CRIME-FREE ZONES
      
9.97.   REGULATION OF REGISTERED SEX OFFENDERS
      
9.98.   PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS, PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE AND OTHER
SYNTHETIC DRUGS
ARTICLE I. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
CHAPTER 9.04: IMPROPER USE OF CITY INSIGNIA
Section
   
9.04.010   Unlawful use of official indicia
   
9.04.020   Private purpose defined
   
9.04.025   Use of the city seal
   
9.04.030   Violation - penalty
   
9.04.040   Penalty supplemental to other penalties and remedies
§ 9.04.010 UNLAWFUL USE OF OFFICIAL INDICIA.
   It is unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to knowingly or
willfully use, or cause the use of, a copy or replica of the official seal of
the city, the original or a copy or replica of the letterhead on city
stationary or any other official indicia of the city or local city public
office for any private or personal purpose.
(Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. 3772, passed 11-9-1978)
§ 9.04.020 PRIVATE PURPOSE DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PRIVATE PURPOSE. Includes, but is not limited to, the support or endorsement
of or opposition to any candidate for a public office or the support or
endorsement of or opposition to any ballot measure, initiative, referendum or
any other matter voted upon at a public election. Additionally, PRIVATE PURPOSE
has that meaning ascribed to it by judicial decisions of courts of competent
jurisdiction as such term is distinguished from the term PUBLIC PURPOSE.
(Ord. 3772, passed 11-9-1978)
§ 9.04.025 USE OF THE CITY SEAL.
   The Mayor and City Council may, by written agreement, authorize the private
use of the city seal or other city insignia when it is determined to be in the
best interests of the city, and when it is determined that the public will not
be misled thereby.
(Ord. MC-969, passed 6-4-1996)
§ 9.04.030 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. 3772, passed 11-9-1978)
§ 9.04.040 PENALTY SUPPLEMENTAL TO OTHER PENALTIES AND REMEDIES.
   The penalties imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be
supplemental and in addition to any other penalties or remedies which may be
imposed or provided by other laws or ordinances, such as disciplinary action,
removal from public office, judicial order or judgment or other matter.
(Ord. 3772, passed 11-9-1978)
CHAPTER 9.08: SOLICITING TORT CLAIMS
Section
   
9.08.010   Unlawful acts
   
9.08.020   Interpretations of provisions
   
9.08.030   Violation - penalty
§ 9.08.010 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to solicit employment for himself or herself
or for any other person, either directly or through some other person acting on
his or her behalf, to prosecute, collect, settle, compromise or to negotiate
for the settlement, compromise or collection of any tort claim, on behalf of
any tort claimant, in which he or she himself or herself has no pecuniary
interest arising from such tort.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 1530, passed 7-3-1934)
§ 9.08.020 INTERPRETATIONS OF PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prevent joint tort
claimants from negotiating with each other for the purpose of combining
respective claims or actions against the tort feasor.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 1530, passed 7-3-1934)
§ 9.08.030 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 1530, passed 7-3-1934; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-
15-1985)
CHAPTER 9.12: DISTURBING CITY BUSINESS
Section
   
9.12.010   Interference with city business
   
9.12.020   Reserved
   
9.12.030   Authority of Mayor or other official
   
9.12.040   Remaining in municipal public building when building closed a
misdemeanor
§ 9.12.010 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY BUSINESS.
   Every person, except officers or employees of any governmental agency on
official business, who willfully interferes with the good order, lawful conduct
or administration of any municipal program or activity of the city, or with any
city official in the performance of his or her duty, with the intent to
disrupt, obstruct or to inflict damage to property or bodily injury upon any
person, is guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction which, upon conviction
thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3038, passed 12-23-1969; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985; Ord. MC-684, passed 11-22-1989)
§ 9.12.020 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord MC-684, passed 11-22-1989)
§ 9.12.030 AUTHORITY OF MAYOR OR OTHER OFFICIAL.
   (A)   The Mayor, or any officer or employee designated by him or her or law
to maintain order in any building or facility owned or leased by the city, may
notify a person, except any officer or employee of a governmental agency on
official business, that consent to remain in building or facility has been
withdrawn whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that such person has
willfully disrupted conduct of activities of such building or facility and may
direct such person to identify himself or herself and to leave the building.
   (B)   Any person who has been directed to leave a city building or facility
pursuant to division (A) above shall identify himself or herself to the officer
by providing his or her full name, address and date of birth. Any person who
refuses to identify himself or herself or who fails to immediately leave such
building or facility or who willfully and knowingly re-enters such building or
facility within 72 hours after being directed to leave is guilty of a
misdemeanor or an infraction which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3038, passed 12-23-1969; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985; Ord. MC-684, passed 11-22-1989; Ord. MC-971, passed 6-4-1996)
§ 9.12.040 REMAINING IN MUNICIPAL PUBLIC BUILDING WHEN BUILDING CLOSED A
MISDEMEANOR.
   (A)   Any person, other than an authorized public officer or employee acting
within the course and scope of his or her employment, who enters or remains in
any municipal building or facility with the knowledge that such building or
facility is closed to the public and who does not have the present consent of
an official of the city for his or her presence in the building or facility, is
guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is
punishable in accordance with the provision of §
1.12.010.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the City Hall shall be open to the
public for the transaction of business between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30
p.m. daily, except on Saturdays, Sundays and those city holidays designated by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, regular
meeting rooms of the City Hall may be considered as open to the public during
such times as regularly or specially called or scheduled meetings of the Mayor
and City Council, and city boards, commissions and committees are called or
held; provided, however, that only that portion of the City Hall shall be
considered as open as is designated by the city as necessary to provide
reasonable ingress and egress to the open and public meeting facilities; and
all other portions of the City Hall shall remain and be considered as closed;
provided, further, that the meeting facilities and access thereto and therefrom
shall be considered as closed after the expiration of one-half hour from the
time of the adjournment or termination of the meeting.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3520, passed 8-19-1975; Ord. 3920, passed 2-
25-1980; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-684, passed 11-22-1989)
CHAPTER 9.16: FALSE REPORTS
Section
   
9.16.010   Prohibited acts
   
9.16.020   Violation - penalty
§ 9.16.010 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully make to any police officer of the
City Police Department any false, misleading or unfounded oral or written
statement or report, knowing such statement or report to be false, misleading
or unfounded, for the purpose of interfering with the operation of the Police
Department or with the intention of misleading such police officer in the
performance of his or her duties; provided, however, that this section is not
applicable to a false report that a felony or misdemeanor has been committed,
as covered by the provisions of Cal. Penal Code, § 148.5.
(Ord. 2003, passed 11-17-1953; Ord. 2664, passed 4-13-1965; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985)
§ 9.16.020 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is
guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 2003, passed 11-17-1953; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
ARTICLE II. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
CHAPTER 9.20: LEG-HOLD TRAPS
Section
   
9.20.010   Definition
   
9.20.020   Unlawful use
§ 9.20.010 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LEG-HOLD TRAP. Any device, snare or machine which shuts suddenly as with a
spring, holding the leg of an animal, except mouse traps and rat traps.
(Ord. 3896, passed 1-9-1980)
§ 9.20.020 UNLAWFUL USE.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to set or use any leg-
hold trap within the city limits.
(Ord. 3896, passed 1-9-1980)
ARTICLE III. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
CHAPTER 9.28: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
Section
   
9.28.010   Urination and defecation prohibited where
   
9.28.020   Masturbation prohibited where
   
9.28.030   Presence in public restroom where person masturbating prohibited
   
9.28.040   Violation - penalty
§ 9.28.010 URINATION AND DEFECATION PROHIBITED WHERE.
   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any public park,
street, alley, highway, public meeting, assembly or other public place, or in
the immediate neighborhood thereof and in view from the same places; provided
that this section shall not be applicable to the act of urinating or defecating
in a proper receptacle in a restroom or bathroom in any enclosed structure.
(Ord. 1657, passed 4-22-1941; Ord. 2552, passed 1-28-1964; Ord. MC-978, passed
8-6-1996)
§ 9.28.020 MASTURBATION PROHIBITED WHERE.
   It is unlawful for any person to masturbate in a public restroom or other
public place. In order to establish the commission of the foregoing offense, it
shall not be necessary to prove that the accused had an orgasm or an emission.
(Ord. 1657, passed 4-22-1941; Ord. 2552, passed 1-28-1964)
§ 9.28.030 PRESENCE IN PUBLIC RESTROOM WHERE PERSON MASTURBATING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall knowingly be present in any public restroom where another
person or persons are masturbating.
(Ord. 1657, passed 4-22-1941; Ord. 2552, passed 1-28-1964)
§ 9.28.040 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person or persons violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor or an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 1657, passed 4-22-1941; Ord. 2552, passed 1-28-1964; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985; Ord. MC-978, passed 8-6-1996)
CHAPTER 9.32: PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL
Section
   
9.32.010   Definitions
   
9.32.015   Possession of open container, presumption of consuming alcohol
   
9.32.020   Consumption of alcoholic beverage unlawful where
   
9.32.030   Offering or furnishing alcoholic beverages for consumption unlawful
where
   
9.32.040   Exceptions to public consumption
   
9.32.050   Violation a menace to safety of public
   
9.32.060   Violation - penalty
§ 9.32.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains
0.5% or more of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for beverage purposes,
either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.
   PUBLIC PARK, STREET, ALLEY, HIGHWAY or OTHER PUBLIC PLACE. Refers only to
those public parks, streets, alleys, highways or other public places within the
corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 1554, passed 10-22-1935; Ord. 3867, passed 9-18-1979)
§ 9.32.015 POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINER, PRESUMPTION OF CONSUMING ALCOHOL.
   For purposes of this chapter, any person possessing an open container
containing an alcoholic beverage, and having an odor of alcoholic beverage on
the person’s breath, is presumed to be drinking or consuming or attempting to
drink or consume an alcoholic beverage at the place where such person is
located. This presumption is a presumption affecting the burden of producing
evidence, as that term is used in the Cal. Evidence Code, §§ 603 and 604.
(Ord. 3867, passed 9-18-1979; Ord. MC-352, passed 3-7-1984)
§ 9.32.020 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE UNLAWFUL WHERE.
   It is unlawful for any person or persons to drink or consume, or attempt to
drink or consume, any alcoholic beverages while such person or persons are in
or upon any public park, street, alley, highway or other public place, except
in or upon those public places where the drinking or consuming of alcoholic
beverages is expressly permitted by law.
(Ord. 1554, passed 10-22-1935)
§ 9.32.030 OFFERING OR FURNISHING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR CONSUMPTION UNLAWFUL
WHERE.
   It is unlawful for any person or persons while in or upon any public park,
street, alley, highway or other public place, except in or upon those public
places where the drinking or consuming of alcoholic beverages is expressly
permitted by law, to offer or furnish or give, or cause to be offered or
furnished or given, any alcoholic beverages to any other person or persons with
the intention that such other person or persons shall drink or consume
alcoholic beverages while such other person or persons are in or upon any
public park, street, alley, highway or other public place, except in or upon
these public places where the drinking or consumption of alcoholic beverages is
expressly permitted by law.
(Ord. 1554, passed 10-22-1935)
§ 9.32.040 EXCEPTIONS TO PUBLIC CONSUMPTION.
   The drinking or consumption and the offering, giving or furnishing of
alcoholic beverages may be expressly permitted by written authorization from
the City Administrator, or his or her designee, in any building, facility,
park, street or other place owned, leased, operated or under the management and
control of the city for special events, meetings, conferences or conventions;
provided that such authorization shall be requested in writing and if granted,
shall be subject to conditions and all rules, regulations and ordinances of the
city; and further, provided that such permit may be modified or summarily
revoked at any time by the Mayor, Council, City Administrator or Chief of
Police without notice or hearing.
(Ord. 1554, passed 10-22-1935; Ord. 3265, passed 5-5-1972; Ord. MC-207, passed
9-20-1982)
§ 9.32.050 VIOLATION A MENACE TO SAFETY OF PUBLIC.
   The violation of any of the provisions of §§
9.32.020 to
9.32.040 is and constitutes a menace to the safety of the general public,
injurious to the health, indecent, offensive to the senses and an obstruction
to the use of public property so as to interfere with the comfort and enjoyment
of such public property by the entire community and neighborhood and by a
considerable number of persons therein.
(Ord. 1554, passed 10-22-1935)
§ 9.32.060 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person or persons violating any provisions of this chapter is guilty of
an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 1554, passed 10-22-1935; Ord. MC-352, passed 3-7-1984; Ord. MC-460,
passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 9.36: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-165, passed 5-5-1982)
CHAPTER 9.40: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-65, passed 6-19-1981)
CHAPTER 9.44: GAMES OF CHANCE
Section
   
9.44.010   Use of premises for certain games unlawful
   
9.44.020   Playing certain games for money unlawful
   
9.44.030   Violation - penalty
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on gaming, see Cal. Penal Code, §§ 330 et seq.
   For provisions on lotteries, see Cal. Penal Code, §§ 319 et seq.
§ 9.44.010 USE OF PREMISES FOR CERTAIN GAMES UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, knowingly to permit any house, room, apartment or place owned by him
or her or under his or her charge or control, to be used in whole or in part
for playing, conducting, dealing or carrying on therein any game of chance not
mentioned in the Cal. Penal Code, §§ 330 and 330a or other state law, with
cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls, cues, pins, checkers, counters,
quoits, beans, spindles, tables, wheels or machines, or any other device,
contrivance or apparatus, for money, checks, chips, credit or any other
representative of value or for any merchandise or any other thing of value.
(Ord. 536, passed 11-4-1913; Ord. 2643, passed 2-2-1965)
§ 9.44.020 PLAYING CERTAIN GAMES FOR MONEY UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person to play or bet at or against, or as owner or
employee to open, deal, play, carry on or conduct, any game of chance not
mentioned in the Cal. Penal Code, §§ 330 or 330a or other state law, which is
played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, billiard balls, pool
balls, cues, pins, checkers, counters, quoits, beans, spindles, tables, wheels,
machines or any other device, contrivance or apparatus, for money, checks,
chips, credit or any other representative of value or for any merchandise or
any other thing of value.
(Ord. 536, passed 11-4-1913; Ord. 2643, passed 2-2-1965)
§ 9.44.030 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 536, passed 11-4-1913; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
ARTICLE IV. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
CHAPTER 9.48: SOUND-MAKING OR SOUND-AMPLIFYING DEVICES
Section
   
9.48.010   Definitions
   
9.48.020   Unlawful noises
   
9.48.030   Applicability
§ 9.48.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOUD AND RAUCOUS NOISE. Any sound or any recording thereof when amplified or
increased by any electrical, mechanical or other device to such volume,
intensity or carrying power as to unreasonably interfere with the peace and
quiet of other persons within or upon any one or more of such places or areas,
or as to unreasonably annoy, disturb, impair or endanger the comfort, repose,
health or safety of other persons within or upon any one or more of such places
or areas.
   UNREASONABLY. Includes, but is not limited to, consideration of the hour,
place, nature and circumstances of the emission or transmission of any such
loud and raucous noise.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3858, passed 8-21-1979)
§ 9.48.020 UNLAWFUL NOISES.
   It is unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit the emission or
transmission of any loud or raucous noise from any sound-making or sound-
amplifying device in his or her possession or under his or her control:
   (A)   Upon any private property;
   (B)   Upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, passageway or thoroughfare;
or
   (C)   In or upon any public park or other public place or property.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3858, passed 8-21-1979)
§ 9.48.030 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall be applicable notwithstanding any other provision of law
and shall be in addition and supplemental to any other provision of law.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3858, passed 8-21-1979)
CHAPTER 9.49: RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES - SHOPPING CENTERS
Section
   
9.49.010   Definitions
   
9.49.020   Purpose and findings
   
9.49.030   Unlawful recreational activities
   
9.49.040   Permit for recreational activity
   
9.49.050   Violation - penalty
§ 9.49.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RECREATIONAL ACTIVITY. Dancing, including “break dancing” and any similar
recreational body or physical movements performed with or without the
accompaniment of music, whether performed alone or by couples or groups, and
other activities which attract spectators as an amusement or recreational
audience or which are done as an exhibition or contest.
   REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER. The Inland Shopping Center or the Central City
Mall in the City of San Bernardino.
(Ord. MC-355, passed 3-22-1984)
§ 9.49.020 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to permit the free passage of
pedestrians in, and the unobstructed use of, regional shopping centers.
   (B)   It is found that the following apply.
      (1)   Regional shopping centers exist for the primary purpose of
providing places for stores to sell merchandise or services to persons who wish
to obtain such merchandise or services.
      (2)   Such shopping centers are also visited by persons who are not
transacting any business there, but who are engaging in recreational activities
as defined herein.
      (3)   Such recreational activities attract crowds of people which
obstruct access to store entrances, impede the movement of pedestrians on
stairs and passageways, harass and annoy shoppers on the premises, monopolize
seating, damage landscaping and interfere with the conduct of legitimate
businesses.
      (4)   The city is expending public funds to maintain the vitality of
commerce within the community and derives a large portion of its revenues from
taxes on commercial activity.
      (5)   The public areas of the Central City Mall are subject to
contractual rights and non-exclusive easements for the benefit of the private
property owners within the mall.
(Ord. MC-355, passed 3-22-1984)
§ 9.49.030 UNLAWFUL RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES.
   Except as authorized by permit, it is unlawful for any person or persons to
engage in any recreational activity, as defined in §
9.49.010, whether performed alone or with another person or persons upon any
public area or passageway of the enclosed area of any regional shopping center
during the business hours of any commercial activity in such regional shopping
center.
(Ord. MC-355, passed 3-22-1984)
§ 9.49.040 PERMIT FOR RECREATIONAL ACTIVITY.
   Recreational or related activities, as defined herein, shall be authorized
by a permit, and the City Administrator, or his or her designee, is authorized
to issue permits for such recreational activities on any public area or
passageway of the enclosed area of any regional shopping center upon completion
and filing of an application on an approved city form. A permit shall be issued
within three business days after receiving the application therefor upon the
same terms and conditions as those imposed on any other user of the facilities
and subject to comparable requirements contained in § 5.40.060(D), (E), (F),
(G) or (K) relating to solicitations and upon other reasonable conditions as to
time, place and manner.
(Ord. MC-355, passed 3-22-1984)
§ 9.49.050 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of Chapter 9.48 and this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding the amounts set forth in § 1.12.030(B).
(Ord. MC-355, passed 3-22-1984)
ARTICLE V. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
CHAPTER 9.52: TRESPASS
Section
   
9.52.010   Definition
   
9.52.020   Unlawful trespass
   
9.52.030   Applicability
   
9.52.040   Posted boundary
   
9.52.050   Tearing down posted sign a misdemeanor when
   
9.52.060   Reserved
   
9.52.070   Remaining in certain places without consent of owner an infraction
when - exception
   
9.52.080   Violation - penalty
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on trespassing, see Cal. Penal Code, §§ 602 and 602.5
§ 9.52.010 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   POSTED PROPERTY. Any property, at each corner of which and at each entrance
to which, and when at intervals of not more than 600 feet along or near the
boundary thereof, and not less than three feet nor more than six feet above the
normal ground level thereof, there is a sign of wood, metal or other material,
the face of which is not less than two square feet in area, and upon which in
legible letters, not less than three inches in height, either black against a
white background or white against a black background, appear the words “no
trespassing,” which sign may contain, in addition to said words, such other
words as may be desired.
(Ord. 1645, passed 8-20-1940)
§ 9.52.020 UNLAWFUL TRESPASS.
   It is unlawful for any person to enter into, upon, go across or remain in or
upon the posted property of another without having upon his or her person the
express written consent of the owner, tenant or person, firm or corporation in
lawful possession or control thereof, if such property is used for or designed
to be used for any one or more of the following purposes: the storage of
dynamite, giant powder, gun powder or any inflammable or explosive substance;
every railroad bridge, railroad tunnel, railroad track, railroad rights-of-way,
railroad shops and railroad stations; every reservoir, dam, pumping station,
power plant, generating plant, receiving station, distributing station and
transmission line of any company or agency furnishing electrical energy;
generating plant, compressor plant, gas holder, gas tank and gas main used for
the production, storage and distribution of gas; every plant or vital part
thereof essential to rendering telephone or telegraph service; every radio
broadcasting plant and station; tanks and reservoirs used for the bulk
treatment, bulk handling or bulk storage of petroleum or petroleum products;
all public utility property; industrial plants; and any and all mechanical
shops or businesses that are connected with the national defense or
preparedness program; and any and all uses appurtenant or incident to any of
the specified uses described in this section.
(Ord. 1645, passed 8-20-1940)
§ 9.52.030 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter does not apply to any entry in the course of duty of any duly
authorized public officer, nor does it apply to the lawful use of any public
highway, road or street, nor shall this chapter be so construed to prohibit the
use of the public highways, roads or streets for the purpose of picketing.
(Ord. 1645, passed 8-20-1940)
§ 9.52.040 POSTED BOUNDARY.
   The posted boundary of any area shall be a line running from sign to sign,
and such line need not conform to the legal description of any lot, parcel or
acreage of land.
(Ord. 1645, passed 8-20-1940)
§ 9.52.050 TEARING DOWN POSTED SIGN A MISDEMEANOR WHEN.
   Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who, without permission, tears down,
defaces or destroys, or causes to be torn down, defaced or destroyed, any sign
so placed or posted under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1645, passed 8-20-1940)
§ 9.52.060 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 9.52.070 REMAINING IN CERTAIN PLACES WITHOUT CONSENT OF OWNER AN INFRACTION
WHEN - EXCEPTION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, other than a public officer or employee
acting within the course and scope of his or her employment, to enter or remain
upon any motor vehicle parking lot, motor vehicle parking structure or
facility, drive-in property, shopping center property or any other place or
property open to the public, without the implied or express consent of the
owner, his or her agent or person in lawful possession thereof, or with the
knowledge that such consent has been withdrawn.
   (B)   This section shall not apply in any of the following instances:
      (1)   Where its application is directly related to an act prohibited by
the Unruh Civil Rights Act or other law relating to prohibited discrimination
against any person on account of sex, color, race, religion, creed, ancestry or
national origin;
      (2)   Where its application involves or is directly related to an act
prohibited by the Cal. Penal Code, § 365 or other law relating to the duties of
innkeepers or common carriers; or
      (3)   Where the property described in division (A) above is owned, leased
or operated by the city or any other public entity and is open to the public
and the application of this section would result in an interference with or
inhibition of the exercise of a constitutionally protected right of freedom of
speech; provided the exercise of such right does not involve prohibited
conduct, including, but not limited to, conduct prohibited by the Cal. Penal
Code, §§ 647(2) or 415 or any law or ordinance relating to the obstruction of
any street, sidewalk or other public place or place open to the public.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3465, passed 12-17-1974; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985)
Statutory reference:
   Unruh Civil Rights Act, see Cal. Civil Code, § 51
§ 9.52.080 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 9.56: MOTOR VEHICLE TRESPASS
Section
   
9.56.010   Prohibited acts
§ 9.56.010 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive a motorcycle or a motor driven
vehicle or any other motor vehicle on any lands under cultivation or enclosed
by a fence, belonging to or occupied by another, or to drive such motor vehicle
on any uncultivated or unenclosed land where signs forbidding trespass are
displayed at intervals not greater than one-third of a mile along all exterior
boundaries and along all roads and trails entering such lands, without having
and, upon request of a peace officer, displaying written permission from the
owner of such lands, or his or her agent, or the person in lawful possession
thereof; provided, however, that this section does not apply to persons having
visible or lawful business with the owner, agent or person in lawful
possession. Such signs forbidding trespass may be of any size and wording which
will fairly advise persons that the use of the land is so restricted.
   (B)   Any person so driving a motorcycle or a motor driven vehicle or any
other motor vehicle on such lands who has knowledge, actual or constructive,
that trespass signs have previously been so displayed and have been removed or
destroyed without the consent of the owner of such lands, his or her agent or
the person in lawful possession thereof shall be in violation of this section
even though the trespass signs are not then in place.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3095, passed 8-11-1970; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-
15-1985)
CHAPTER 9.58: PRIVATE SURVEILLANCE EQUIPMENT
Section
   
9.58.010   Purpose
   
9.58.020   Private surveillance equipment
   
9.58.030   Location of private surveillance equipment
   
9.58.040   Positioning of private surveillance equipment
   
9.58.050   Penalty
   
9.58.060   Severability
§ 9.58.010 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is intended to prohibit intrusion upon the privacy of citizens
in the use of residential property, without impairing the rights of other
citizens to protect their own property through the use of private surveillance
equipment.
§ 9.58.020 PRIVATE SURVEILLANCE EQUIPMENT.
   As used in this chapter, private surveillance equipment includes any device
used by a private party that enables the user to observe or record the
activities of, or hear or intercept the communications of, other persons.
§ 9.58.030 LOCATION OF PRIVATE SURVEILLANCE EQUIPMENT.
   No private surveillance equipment, as defined in §
9.58.020, shall be located on any property that the owner of the equipment does
not own or have the legal right to possess.
§ 9.58.040 POSITIONING OF PRIVATE SURVEILLANCE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No private surveillance equipment shall be positioned in such a way as
to intrude upon the privacy of the occupier(s) of any residential property
other than the user’s property.
   (B)   Circumstances in which such an intrusion shall be deemed to occur are
any one or more of the following:
      (1)   The equipment is positioned so as to enable the user to observe, or
to receive or capture a visual image of any part of the other property that is
not readily visible from the public right-of-way;
      (2)   The equipment is positioned so as to enable the user to hear or
intercept communications occurring on the other property that is not readily
audible from outside the property without artificial amplification;
      (3)   The equipment is positioned so as to maintain under continual
surveillance any part of the other property, whether or not that part of the
property is visible from the public right-of-way. As used in this provision,
CONTINUAL SURVEILLANCE means any surveillance that lasts for more than 30
seconds at a time;
      (4)   The equipment is positioned in such a way that the surveillance it
provides is primarily surveillance of the other property and not of the user’s
property; and
      (5)   Any other circumstance in which the use of the equipment
constitutes:
         (a)   Intrusion into a private place, conversation or matter; and
         (b)   In a manner highly offensive to a reasonable person.
Statutory reference:
   Shulman v. Group W Productions, Inc. (1998) 18 Cal. 4th 200, 231, 74 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 843, 955 P. 2d 469
§ 9.58.050 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor or an infraction and is
punishable under
Chapter 1.12 or
Chapter 9.93 or under both of those chapters.
§ 9.58.060 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any provision is held
to be invalid, the validity of the remaining provisions shall not be affected.
(Ord. MC-1314, passed 9-22-2009)
ARTICLE VI. CONSUMER PROTECTION
CHAPTER 9.60: PROHIBITION AGAINST CERTAIN FORMS OF AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION
Section
   
9.60.010   Definitions
   
9.60.020   Aggressive solicitation prohibited
   
9.60.030   All solicitation prohibited at specified locations
   
9.60.040   Penalty
   
9.60.050   Severability
   
9.60.060   Saving clause
   
9.60.070   Non-exclusivity
§ 9.60.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC PLACE. A place to which the public or a substantial group of persons
has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, sidewalk,
parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park,
playground and any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby and other portion of any
business establishment, an apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or
apartment designed for actual residence.
   SOLICIT, ASK or BEG. Using the spoken, written or printed word, or bodily
gestures, signs or other means, with the purpose of obtaining an immediate
donation of money or other thing of value or soliciting the sale of goods or
services.
§ 9.60.020 AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall solicit, ask or beg in an aggressive manner in any
public place.
   (B)   AGGRESSIVE MANNER shall mean any of the following:
      (1)   Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before,
during or after soliciting, asking or begging, if that conduct is intended or
is likely to cause a reasonable person to:
         (a)   Fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of
property; or
         (b)   Otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of
value.
      (2)   Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another
person or an occupied vehicle without that person’s consent in the course of
soliciting, asking or begging;
      (3)   Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage
of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a
pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical
contact;
      (4)   Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited
either before, during or after soliciting, asking or begging;
      (5)   Persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the
person solicited has been solicited and informed the solicitor by words or
conduct that such person does not want to be solicited or does not want to give
money or any other thing of value to the solicitor; or
      (6)   Using profane, offensive or abusive language which is inherently
likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction, either before, during or after
solicitation.
§ 9.60.030 ALL SOLICITATION PROHIBITED AT SPECIFIED LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Banks and ATMs.
      (1)   Prohibition. No person shall solicit, ask or beg within 15 feet of
any entrance or exit of any bank, savings and loan association, credit union or
check cashing business during its business hours or within 15 feet of any
automated teller machine during the time it is available for customers’ use.
Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an
automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the
entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. Provided, further,
that no person shall solicit, ask or beg within an automated teller machine
facility where a reasonable person would or should know that he or she does not
have the permission to do so from the owner or other person lawfully in
possession of such facility. Nothing in this division (A) shall be construed to
prohibit the lawful vending of goods and services within such areas.
      (2)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE. Any electronic information processing device
which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit or
convenience account.
         AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY. The area comprised of one or more
automated teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to
banking customers after regular banking hours.
         BANK. Any member bank of the Federal Reserve System, and any bank,
banking association, trust company, savings bank or other banking institution
organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and any bank the
deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
         CHECK CASHING BUSINESS. Any person duly licensed as a check seller,
bill payer or prorater, pursuant to the Cal. Financial Code, Division 3,
commencing with § 12000.
         CREDIT UNION. Any federal credit union and any state chartered credit
union the accounts of which are insured by the administrator of the National
Credit Union Administration.
         SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION. Any federal savings and loan association
and any insured institution, as defined in § 401 of the National Housing Act,
as amended, and any federal credit union, as defined in § 2 of the Federal
Credit Union Act.
      (3)   Exemptions. The provisions of this division (A) shall not apply to
any unenclosed automated teller machine located within any building, structure
or space whose primary purpose or function is unrelated to banking activities,
including, but not limited to, supermarkets, airports and school buildings;
provided that such automated teller machine shall be available for use only
during the regular hours of operation of the building, structure or space in
which such machine is located.
   (B)   Motor vehicles and parking lots.
      (1)   Motor vehicles. No person shall approach an operator or occupant of
a motor vehicle for the purpose of soliciting, asking or begging while such
vehicle is located in any public place.
      (2)   Parking lots.
         (a)   No person shall solicit, ask or beg in any public parking lot or
structure any time after dark.
         (b)   AFTER DARK means any time from one-half hour after sunset to
one-half hour before sunrise.
      (3)   Exemptions. This division (B) shall not apply to any of the
following:
         (a)   Solicitations related to business which is being conducted on
the subject premises by the owner or lawful tenants;
         (b)   Solicitations related to the lawful towing of a vehicle; or
         (c)   Solicitations related to emergency repairs requested by the
operator or other occupant of a vehicle.
   (C)   Public transportation vehicles.
      (1)   PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE shall mean any vehicle, including a
trailer bus, designed, used or maintained for carrying ten or more persons,
including the driver; or a passenger vehicle designed for carrying fewer than
ten persons, including the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire.
      (2)   Any person who solicits, asks or begs in any public transportation
vehicle is guilty of a violation of this section.
Statutory reference:
   Federal Credit Union Act, see 12 U.S.C. § 1752
§ 9.60.040 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter is punishable as a misdemeanor or infraction,
chargeable at the City Attorney’s discretion.
§ 9.60.050 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable.
The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, division, section or portion
of this chapter, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or
circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or
the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances.
§ 9.60.060 SAVING CLAUSE.
   Should this chapter be stricken, enjoined or suspended by any court of law,
the provisions of §
5.04.360, which were made inoperable by this chapter, will be automatically
reenacted as of the date this chapter was stricken, enjoined or suspended.
§ 9.60.070 NON-EXCLUSIVITY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of other
applicable laws.
(Ord. MC-1186, passed 10-5-2004)
CHAPTER 9.62: MEDIAN ISLAND SAFETY
Section
   
9.62.010   Declaration of purpose of median islands
   
9.62.020   Definitions
   
9.62.030   Prohibition of lingering, solicitation or loitering on median
islands
   
9.62.040   Signs or other objects prohibited
   
9.62.050   Distribution or exchange of objects prohibited
   
9.62.060   Exceptions
   
9.62.070   Violation
   
9.62.080   Severability
Editor’s note:
   This chapter is added by Ord. MC-1419, passed 12-7-2015.
§ 9.62.010 DECLARATION OF PURPOSE OF MEDIAN ISLANDS.
   The City Council declares the purpose of median islands within city streets
is as follows:
   (A)   To promote safety by separation vehicular traffic traveling in one
direction from vehicular traffic traveling in the opposite direction;
   (B)   To promote safety by providing a place of safety and respite for
pedestrians while crossing city streets at intersections and other approved
crossings, particularly for the elderly and disabled who may need additional
time to safely cross city streets that traffic signals allow; and
   (C)   To improve the visual appeal of city streets.
(Ord. MC-1419, passed 12-7-2015)
§ 9.62.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LINGER. Remaining in a median island longer than two traffic signal cycles,
except in an emergency.
   LOITERING. Standing or lingering in a median island for any purpose other
than to safely and lawfully cross the street, except in an emergency.
   MEDIAN ISLAND. A paved or planted area separating a street or highway, into
two or more lanes or directions of travel, excluding transit stations that are
situated between lanes of travel.
   SOLICIT. Any request made in person seeking an immediate request for or
donation of money, food, cigarettes or any other items of value, or for the
purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances
where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a
donation. SOLICIT also means any verbal request, or any non-verbal request made
with a sign, by a person seeking an immediate donation of money, food,
cigarettes or any other items of value or the request that items be purchased
for any goods, wares or merchandise or any article to be delivered in the
future, or for services to be performed in the future, or for making,
manufacturing or repairing any article whatsoever for future delivery, or for
subscriptions to periodicals or tickets of admission to entertainments or
memberships in any clubs.
(Ord. MC-1419, passed 12-7-2015)
§ 9.62.030 PROHIBITION OF LINGERING, SOLICITATION OR LOITERING ON MEDIAN
ISLANDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to linger, solicit or loiter on a median
island within the city.
(Ord. MC-1419, passed 12-7-2015)
§ 9.62.040 SIGNS OR OTHER OBJECTS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall bring any sign, material or other object on the median
island that will obstruct any traffic signal light or extend into a traffic
lane or obscure any traffic sign on a median island. No person, sign, material
or other object on the median island shall obstruct any traffic signal light or
extend into a traffic lane or obstruct a traffic sign on such a median island.
(Ord. MC-1419, passed 12-7-2015)
§ 9.62.050 DISTRIBUTION OR EXCHANGE OF OBJECTS PROHIBITED.
   No person, while standing on a median island or by stepping off a median
island, shall exchange any object with an occupant of a motor vehicle.
(Ord. MC-1419, passed 12-7-2015)
§ 9.62.060 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to freeway oriented solicitation
prohibited by Cal. Vehicle Code, § 22520.5.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to those persons occupying a median while
conducting activities related to maintenance, surveying, construction,
landscape maintenance, landscape improvements, law enforcement, responding to
an emergency or as otherwise permitted by law.
(Ord. MC-1419, passed 12-7-2015)
§ 9.62.070 VIOLATION.
   A violation of this chapter is an infraction or misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with §
1.12.010. In addition, the City Attorney shall also have the power to see
injunctive relief for any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1419, passed 12-7-2015)
§ 9.62.080 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council
declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, division,
sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any
one or more sections, divisions, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions
thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. MC-1419, passed 12-7-2015)
CHAPTER 9.64: FAKE SALES
Section
   
9.64.010   Defined
   
9.64.020   Unlawful acts
   
9.64.030   Violation - penalty
§ 9.64.010 DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FAKE SALE.
      (1)   The sale of goods, wares or merchandise at auction or otherwise to
agents or other persons purchasing the same for or on behalf of the owner or
other person interested in the sale thereof;
      (2)   The sale of goods, wares or merchandise or the offering of goods,
wares or merchandise for sale in limited quantity or quantities of less than
the full amount of such merchandise owned or carried in stock by the person,
firm or corporation offering the same for sale;
      (3)   The offering for sale of goods, wares or merchandise of a different
quality, brand or bearing a different trademark as a substitute for merchandise
previously advertised for sale;
      (4)   The sale of any goods, wares or merchandise misrepresented as to
quantity or quality or otherwise; and
      (5)   The sale or offering for sale of any goods, wares and merchandise
transported or brought into the city, or not constituting the original
legitimate stock of goods, wares and merchandise of a place of business within
the city, as the original and legitimate stock of goods, wares and merchandise
of such place of business, at a bankrupt, insurance, mortgage, insolvency,
assignee’s, receiver’s, trustee’s, creditor’s, executor’s or administrator’s
forced removal or closing-out sale, or the sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke
or water or otherwise, in the city. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
prevent, nor shall it be considered unlawful, to sell the original stock of
goods, wares and merchandise of such place of business at a bankrupt,
insurance, mortgage, insolvency, assignee’s, receiver’s, trustee’s, creditor’s,
executor’s or administrator’s forced removal or closing-out sale, but the
bringing of new stock into the city or the adding of new stock to such original
stock of goods, wares and merchandise and selling or offering to sell such new
stock or added stock as the original stock of such goods, wares and merchandise
at the place of business at any of the sales described above, is unlawful and a
fake sale within the meaning of this chapter.
(Ord. 1492, passed 6-21-1932)
§ 9.64.020 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct, make or
advertise any fake sale of goods, wares or merchandise within the city.
(Ord. 1492, passed 6-21-1932)
§ 9.64.030 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter, or
doing any act declared to be unlawful in this chapter, is guilty of an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 1492, passed 6-21-1932; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
ARTICLE VII. OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
CHAPTER 9.68: CURFEW - MINORS
Section
   
9.68.010   Definitions
   
9.68.020   Offenses
   
9.68.030   Defenses
   
9.68.040   Enforcement
   
9.68.050   Penalties
   
9.68.060   Cost recovery
§ 9.68.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURFEW HOURS.
      (1)   11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday
until 6:00 a.m. of the following day;
      (2)   12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday; and
      (3)   The period from 8:00 p.m. on the evening of the city’s sponsored
Market Night(s), until 6:00 a.m. the following day, within the Market Night
outdoor area and all public property located within 20 feet of the Market Night
outdoor area. For purposes of this chapter, the MARKET NIGHT OUTDOOR AREA is
defined as that portion of Perris Hill Park, located between the Flood Control
Channel and Perris Hill Park Road on the west and Elks Drive on the east,
between Highland Avenue on the north and all of the small mountain known as
Perris Hill on the south, located west of an imaginary line extended due south
over said Perris Hill from the point where the southernmost end of Elks Drive
becomes a private road, to the foot of Perris Hill on said hill’s south side
and extending to Perris Hill Park Road.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, a natural disaster or automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent great bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GREAT BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a significant or substantial
physical injury.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
   OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   PARENT. A person who is:
      (1)   A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of another person;
or
      (2)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks,
highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities and shops.
   REMAIN. To:
      (1)   Linger or stay; or
      (2)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer
or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
(Ord. 1915, passed 5-22-1951; Ord. MC-866, passed 4-6-1993; Ord. MC-995, passed
6-17-1997; Ord. MC-1224, passed 5-16-2006)
§ 9.68.020 OFFENSES.
   (A)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or
on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
   (B)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she
knowingly permits or, by insufficient control, allows the minor to remain in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours.
   (C)   The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours.
(Ord. MC-866, passed 4-6-1993; Ord. MC-995, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 9.68.030 DEFENSES.
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
9.68.020 that the minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the U.S. and
California Constitutions, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with Cal. Family Code, § 7002.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
9.68.020(C) that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Ord. MC-866, passed 4-6-1993; Ord. MC-995, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 9.68.040 ENFORCEMENT.
   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place.
The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that,
based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in §
9.68.030 is present.
(Ord. MC-866, passed 4-6-1993; Ord. MC-995, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 9.68.050 PENALTIES.
   A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate
offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed,
continued or permitted. Each violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. MC-866, passed 4-6-1993; Ord. MC-995, passed 6-17-1997)
§ 9.68.060 COST RECOVERY.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority of the Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code, §
625.5, and when based on a finding of civil liability or a criminal conviction
for a subsequent violation of §
9.68.020, when a minor under 18 years of age is detained for a period of time
in excess of one hour for a violation of §
9.68.020 and said detention requires the supervision of the minor by employee
(s) of the City Police Department, the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) having
custody or control of said minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the
cost of providing said supervision and transportation for that minor; provided
that they shall have first received a written warning for a first violation of
§
9.68.020, indicating that recovery of administrative and transportation costs
may be sought upon a second violation. Such costs sought shall be based upon
the “San Bernardino Police Department Extraordinary Law Enforcement Fee Rate
Schedule.” Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code, § 625.5(d) mandates parents or
legal guardians to sign and return the warning notification for any such first
offense of §
9.68.020 committed by any minor. A space will be provided for the explanation
of any circumstances relevant to an applicable exemption from the fee as
provided by Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code, § 625.5(e).
   (B)   As determined by the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, the
minor, the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a minor violating §
9.68.020 may be assessed and billed for the cost of providing personnel for
services relating to the detention, processing or supervision of the minor
beyond those services normally provided by the Police Department. The Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, may waive payment of all or part of the charges
if the determination is made that the person has made reasonable efforts to
exercise the Supervision and control over the minor; if the determination is
made that neither the minor, the parent(s) or the guardian(s) have the ability
to pay the charges; if the determination is made to allow the performance of
community service in lieu of imposition of the fee or if the determination is
made that the parent(s); or legal guardian(s) have limited physical or legal
custody and control of the minor.
   (C)   Any person receiving a bill for police services pursuant to this
section may, within ten days after the date of the bill, file a written appeal
with the City Clerk. Any billing sent pursuant to this section shall notify the
billed party of the right to appeal said charges. The city official designated
by the Mayor, or his or her designee, shall hear such appeal as the hearing
officer. Such hearing shall be informal and shall not be bound by the formal
rules of evidence. The hearing officer may waive payment of the charges in full
or in part upon a finding of good cause. Within 30 days after the hearing, the
hearing officer shall give written notice of the decision to the appellant. The
requirement to pay the charges shall be stayed during the pendency of the
appeal if the appeal is denied in part or in full, all amounts due to the city
shall be paid within 30 days of the notice of the decision of the hearing
officer.
(Ord. 1915, passed 5-22-1951; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-866,
passed 4-6-1993; Ord. MC-967, passed 5-21-1996; Ord. MC-995, passed 6-17-1997)
CHAPTER 9.69: DAYTIME LOITERING
Section
   
9.69.010   Schools hours
   
9.69.020   Exceptions
   
9.69.030   Enforcement
   
9.69.040   Violation
§ 9.69.010 SCHOOLS HOURS.
   (A)   Minors on public streets. It is unlawful for any minor under the age
of 18 years, who is subject to compulsory education or compulsory continuation
education to be or remain in or upon public streets, highways, roads, alleys,
parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings,
school property to which they are not assigned, places of amusement and eating
places, vacant lots or any unsupervised place during the hours for which said
minor is normally assigned to his or her school on days when said school is in
session.
   (B)   Responsibility of parents, guardians and the like. It is unlawful for
the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a
minor under the age of 18 years, who is subject to compulsory education or to
compulsory continuation education, to permit the minor alone or in concert with
others, to be or remain in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys,
parks, playgrounds, parking areas or other public grounds, public places,
places of amusement and eating places, vacant lots or other unsupervised
places, or any place open to the public between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 2:30
p.m. of the same day on days when said minor’s school is in session.
§ 9.69.020 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of §
9.69.010 shall not apply:
   (A)   To a minor who is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or
other adult person having care or custody of the minor;
   (B)   To students who have permission to leave school campus for lunch or
school related activity and have in their possession a valid school-issued
written notice by a school official, but only for a reasonable period of time
necessary for the lunch or activity;
   (C)   To a minor who is going to or coming from his or her gainful place of
employment or medical or dental appointment with verification of said
employment or appointment;
   (D)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her
parents, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the
minor;
   (E)   To a minor who is going directly to or from a school sponsored event
or activity such as a sporting event, field trip or other such school activity;
or
   (F)   To a minor who is going directly to or from an event or activity that
is directly related to any medical condition of a parent, guardian or other
adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
§ 9.69.030 ENFORCEMENT.
   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place
during school hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, and no
exception enumerated in §
9.69.020 is present.
§ 9.69.040 VIOLATION.
   Each violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. MC-996, passed 6-17-1997)
CHAPTER 9.70: PROTECTION OF MINORS
Section
   
9.70.010   Requirement
   
9.70.020   Segregation
   
9.70.030   Violation
§ 9.70.010 REQUIREMENT.
   Any person who knowingly displays material which is harmful to minors, as
defined in Cal. Penal Code, § 313, in a public place, other than a public place
for which minors are excluded, shall place devices commonly known as blinder
racks in front of the material, so that the lower two-thirds of the material is
not exposed to view.
(Ord. MC-797, passed 7-2-1991)
§ 9.70.020 SEGREGATION.
   (A)   This section shall not apply to harmful matter, as defined in Cal.
Penal Code, § 313.
   (B)   Any person who knowingly displays, sells or offers to sell in a public
place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, any book,
magazine or other publication or matter which depicts any photograph or
pictorial representation of any of the anatomical parts of a person’s genitals
or anus, or any act of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy,
masturbation or bestiality, whether actual or simulated, when, to the average
adult person applying contemporary community standards, such photograph or
pictorial representation has as its primary purpose, design or effect sexual
arousal, gratification or affront shall segregate such material from the other
material sold or displayed away from the view and access of minors into an area
to which only adults are admitted, and shall clearly label such segregated area
as “Adults Only.”
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to allow minors access or entry to such “Adults
Only” areas unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to display, sell or offer to sell to any minor
the material described in division (B) above, unless such minor is accompanied
by a parent or guardian.
   (E)   This section shall not apply to nor require the segregation of news
racks.
(Ord. MC-797, passed 7-2-1991)
§ 9.70.030 VIOLATION.
   Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. MC-643, passed 11-22-1988; Ord. MC-797, passed 7-2-1991)
ARTICLE VIII. WEAPONS
CHAPTER 9.80: CONCEALED WEAPONS
Section
   
9.80.010   Definition
   
9.80.015   Carrying a weapon in plain view prohibited
   
9.80.020   Reserved
   
9.80.030   Reserved
   
9.80.040   Reserved
   
9.80.050   Exemption
   
9.80.060   Violation - penalty
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on concealed weapons, see Cal. Penal Code, §§ 12001 et seq.
§ 9.80.010 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS or DEADLY WEAPON. Any knife, dirk or dagger with a fixed blade
four inches or more in length; any ice pick or similar sharp stabbing tool with
a fixed blade four inches or more in length; or any straight-edge razor or any
razor blade four inches or more in length fitted to a handle.
(Ord. MC-651, passed 2-7-1989)
§ 9.80.015 CARRYING A WEAPON IN PLAIN VIEW PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to carry on his or her person in plain view,
including, but not limited to, carrying in sheaths openly suspended from the
waist of the wearer, any deadly or dangerous weapon, as defined in §
9.80.010.
(Ord. MC-651, passed 2-7-1989)
§ 9.80.020 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-651, passed 2-7-1989)
§ 9.80.030 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-651, passed 2-7-1989)
§ 9.80.040 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-651, passed 2-7-1989)
§ 9.80.050 EXEMPTION.
   Section
9.80.015 shall not apply to the carrying of tools or equipment for use in a
lawful occupation or for the purpose of lawful recreation.
(Ord. MC-651, passed 2-7-1989)
§ 9.80.060 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-651, passed 2-7-1989)
CHAPTER 9.84: PROJECTILES
Section
   
9.84.010   Unlawful discharge
   
9.84.020   Violation - penalty
   
9.84.030   Firearm - defined
   
9.84.040   Exemptions
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on the discharge of firearms at inhabited buildings, see Cal.
Penal Code, § 246
§ 9.84.010 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE.
   It is unlawful to discharge an instrument of any kind or description which
throws a bullet or missile for any distance by means of the elastic force of
air or other explosive substance, including, but not limited to, weapons using
air or carbon dioxide (CO2) to propel a bullet or missile and firearms, except
in a regularly licensed and approved shooting gallery or rifle range for which
a permit has been issued by the Mayor and City Council or except as otherwise
authorized and permitted by law.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 2939, passed 9-11-1968)
§ 9.84.020 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010, except that any person violating any provision of this chapter using
a firearm, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by confinement in the
county jail for at least two days in addition to any fine imposed. If probation
is granted upon the conviction of any person using a firearm, a term of
probation shall be minimum of two days’ confinement in the county jail in
addition to any fine imposed.
(Ord. MC-619, passed 3-8-1988)
§ 9.84.030 FIREARM - DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIREARM. Shall include any device designed to be used as a weapon, from
which is expelled a projectile by the force of any explosion, or other form of
combustion, and shall include any rocket, rocket-propelled projectile, launcher
or similar device containing any explosive or incendiary material whether or
not such device is designed for emergency or distress signaling purposes,
excluding model rockets.
(Ord. MC-619, passed 3-8-1988)
§ 9.84.040 EXEMPTIONS.
   Law enforcement officials, while in the performance of their duties, are
exempt from this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1109, passed 12-4-2001)
CHAPTER 9.90: AUTHORITY TO ARREST - CITATIONS
Section
   
9.90.010   Arrest - citation
§ 9.90.010 ARREST - CITATION.
   (A)   Pursuant to the Cal. Penal Code, §§ 836.5, 853.5 and 853.6, the
employees, as listed in each division herein, are authorized and empowered to
arrest and issue notices to appear for violations of the provisions of the
municipal code as hereinafter set forth.
      (1)   Security guard personnel, who shall be off-duty or retired police
officers or reserve police officers, employed by the City Economic Development
Agency, pursuant to an agreement between said Agency and the city, relating to
a security guard program, are authorized and empowered to arrest and issue
notices to appear for violations of the provisions of the municipal code for
incidents arising in the Carousel Mall and public areas in, adjacent to or
immediately surrounding said mall, or other areas pursuant to an agreement
between said Agency and the city.
      (2)   Community service officers are authorized and empowered to arrest
and issue notices to appear for violations of the provisions of this code and
state statutes pursuant to Cal. Penal Code, § 836.5.
      (3)   The Director of Development Services, City Planners, Senior
Planners, Associate Planners and Assistant Planners are authorized and
empowered to issue notices to appear for violations of the provisions of Title
19 and
Chapters 8.36 and
10.16.
      (4)   The Director of Water Reclamation, environmental control
representative and environmental control technicians are authorized and
empowered to issue notices to appear for violations of
Chapter 13.32.
      (5)   The Director of Development Services, or his or her designees, or
City Engineer, or his or her designees, are authorized and empowered to issue
notices to appear for violations of the municipal code and all other codes
incorporated herein by reference.
      (6)   The City Attorney investigators are authorized and empowered to
arrest and issue notices to appear for violations of this code and state
statutes pursuant to Cal. Penal Code, § 836.5; and are authorized upon approval
of the Director of Code Compliance to examine, give notice of, post, secure and
abate all nuisances pursuant to
Chapters 15.28 and
8.30.
      (7)   The Director of Animal Control, animal license checkers, animal
shelter attendants and animal health technicians are authorized and empowered
to issue notices to appear for violations of Title 6, §§
5.04.497 and
12.44.070. Animal control officers are empowered to arrest and issue notices to
appear, pursuant to the California Penal Code, § 830.9.
      (8)   The Director of Code Compliance, and his or her designees, are
authorized and empowered to issue “notices to appear” for violations of the
municipal code, and all other codes incorporated herein by reference.
      (9)   The Director of Parks, Recreation and Community Services, and his
or her designees, are authorized and empowered to issue “notices to appear” for
violations of
Chapter 12.98.
      (10)   Security guard personnel, who shall be off-duty, reserve or
retired police officers employed by the Inland Valley Development Agency
(“Agency”), pursuant to an agreement between said Agency and the city, relating
to a security guard program, and who are under direct supervision of the City
Police Department, are authorized and empowered to arrest and issue notices to
appear for violations of the municipal code for incidents arising on the former
Norton Air Force Base property now owned and operated by the Inland Valley
Development Agency bounded on the north by Third Street, on the south by
Central Avenue, on the west by Lena Road and on the east by Palm Avenue.
      (11)   Parking district security officers, who shall be retired police
officers or reserve police officers, employed by the City Facilities Management
Department are authorized and empowered to arrest and issue notices to appear
for violations of the provisions of this code and state statutes pursuant to
Cal. Penal Code, § 836.5.
      (12)   The San Bernardino Community College Police, who are peace
officers, as defined by the Cal. Penal Code, § 830.32, are authorized and
empowered to arrest and issue citations for violations of the provisions of
Titles 8 and 9, on or near the campus of the community college and on or near
other grounds or properties owned, operated, controlled or administered by the
community college or by the state acting on behalf of the community college.
      (13)   The California Highway Patrol, who are peace officers, as defined
by the Cal. Penal Code, § 830.2(a), are authorized and empowered to arrest and
issue citations for the provisions of this code.
      (14)   The California State University police, who are peace officers, as
defined by the Cal. Penal Code, § 830.2(c), are authorized and empowered to
arrest and issue citations for the provisions of this code on or near the
campus of the university and on or near other grounds or properties owned,
operated, controlled or administered by the university or by the state acting
on behalf of the university.
      (15)   The San Bernardino Unified School District Police, who are peace
officers, as defined by the Cal. Penal Code, § 830.32(b), are authorized and
empowered to arrest and issue citations for the provisions of this code on or
near a campus of the school district and on or near other grounds or properties
owned, operated, controlled or administered by the school district.
      (16)   The Director of Public Services, and his or her designees, are
authorized and empowered to issue notices to appear and/or administrative
citations for violations of
Chapters 8.24 and
8.25. In the event that any provision of this chapter, or any part thereof, or
any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held
to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by a court of
competent jurisdiction on its face or as applied, such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter, or any part thereof,
or any application thereof to any person or circumstance or of said provision
as applied to any other person or circumstance. It is declared to be the
legislative intent of the city that this chapter would have been adopted had
such unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective provision not been included
herein.
      (17)   Haz-mat investigators employed by the City Fire Department are
authorized and empowered to inspect, arrest and issue notices to appear for
violations of this code and California Penal, Vehicle, Fire and Health and
Safety Codes, pursuant to Cal. Penal Code, § 836.5 and Cal. Fire Code, Title
24, Part 9, Chapter 1, Division II.
      (18)   The business registration manager, and his or her designees, are
authorized and empowered to issue notices to appear for violations of Title 3,
Title 5 and Title 8.
      (19)   Security guard personnel, including private security officers
retained by the city to provide security services under contract with the city,
are authorized and empowered to issue citations and notices to appear for
violations of this code occurring on any property owned or leased by the city.
   (B)   Any person interfering or obstructing the enforcement or performance
of any provision of this code by any of the preceding authorized personnel or
any person who removes any notice or sign posted by an authorized person enters
or remains in a structure posted as unsafe and/or unfit for human occupancy
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable
in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-254, passed 3-9-1983; Ord. MC-372, passed 5-22-1984; Ord. MC-404,
passed 8-21-1984; Ord. MC-464, passed 7-2-1985; Ord. MC-586, passed 3-23-1987;
Ord. MC-591, passed 5-13-1987; Ord. MC-606, passed 9-21-1987; Ord. MC-635,
passed 9-7-1988; Ord. MC-931, passed 1-23-1995; Ord. MC-945, passed 6-20-1995;
Ord. MC-952, passed 11-8-1995; Ord. MC-954, passed 11-21-1995; Ord. MC-1005,
passed 10-21-1997; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1034, passed 11-17-
1998; Ord. MC-1143, passed 4-22-2003; Ord. MC-1234, passed 10-3-2006; Ord. MC-
1279, passed 8-5-2008; Ord. MC-1287, passed 10-7-2008; Ord. MC-1563, passed 9-
1-2021; Ord. MC-1596, passed 8-16-2023)
CHAPTER 9.92: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PROCESS
Section
   
9.92.010   Legislative findings and statement of purpose
   
9.92.020   Definitions
   
9.92.030   Use of administrative citation
   
9.92.040   Violation; authority; fines
   
9.92.050   Service procedures
   
9.92.060   Contents of citation
   
9.92.070   Satisfaction of the administrative citation
   
9.92.080   Request for hearing on an administrative citation
   
9.92.090   Failure to pay fines
   
9.92.100   Publication and availability of rules and regulations
   
9.92.110   Reserved
   
9.92.120   Reserved
   
9.92.130   Reserved
   
9.92.140   Disposition of fines
   
9.92.150   Reserved
   
9.92.160   Administrative adjudication procedures not exclusive
   
9.92.170   Applicability of administrative adjudication procedures
   
9.92.180   Right to judicial review
   
9.92.190   Severability
§ 9.92.010 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The Mayor and City Council finds that there is a need for an alternate
method of enforcement for minor violations of the municipal code and applicable
state codes. An appropriate method of enforcement for minor violations is an
administrative citation program as authorized by Cal. Gov’t Code, § 53069.4.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS. All costs incurred by or on behalf of the city from
the first discovery of the violation of the municipal code through the appeal
process, including, but not limited to, staff time in investigating the
violation, inspecting the property where the violation occurred, preparing
investigation reports, sending notices, preparing for and attending any appeal
hearing and attorneys’ fees. ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS shall not mean the fines
assessed pursuant to this chapter. ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS shall not mean late
payment charges that accrue, or collection costs incurred, as a result of
unpaid fines.
   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER. Any person assigned by the City Manager to
preside at administrative hearings.
   CITY MANAGER. The San Bernardino City Manager, or his or her designee.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any code enforcement officer or other city employee or
agent of the city with the authority to enforce any provision of the municipal
code.
   PERSON. Any natural person or entity, including, but not limited to, any
corporation, company, partnership, association, trust or any other form of
business entity.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Includes, but is not limited to, any of the following:
      (1)   A person who causes a code violation to occur;
      (2)   A person who maintains or allows a code violation to continue, by
his or her action or failure to act;
      (3)   A person whose agent, employee or independent contractor causes a
code violation by his or her action or failure to act;
      (4)   A person who is an owner, a lessee or sub-lessee, with the current
right of possession, of real property where a property related code violation
occurs or exists; and
      (5)   If the person or persons are a business entity, the manager or on-
site supervisor where the violation exists shall also be a RESPONSIBLE PARTY.
(Ord. MC-1150, passed 9-16-2003; Ord. MC-1270, passed 5-21-2008; Ord. MC-1553,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.030 USE OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   Whenever an enforcement officer determines that a violation subject to this
chapter has occurred, the officer may issue an administrative citation imposing
fines or penalties to any responsible person in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter. Use of an administrative citation is authorized
by this chapter for any violation of the municipal code.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.040 VIOLATION; AUTHORITY; FINES.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of the municipal code may be issued
an administrative citation by a code enforcement officer, or other authorized
officer, as provided in this title.
   (B)   Each and every day a violation of any provision of the municipal code
exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. Each section of the
municipal code violated constitutes a separate and distinct violation.
   (C)   Any fine assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the
enforcement officer shall be payable directly to the city or its authorized
vendor for receipt of payment.
   (D)   Any person who receives an administrative citation shall be required
to pay a fine in the following amounts unless otherwise established in the
municipal code or established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the first administrative citation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second administrative citation for
violation of the same ordinance if issued within a 12-month period; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $500 for any subsequent administrative
citation issued for violation of the same ordinance within a 12-month period.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.050 SERVICE PROCEDURES.
   In any case where an administrative citation is issued, service of the
citation shall be made by complying with the following.
   (A)   Personal service. The code enforcement officer shall attempt to locate
and personally serve the responsible party and obtain the signature of the
responsible party on the administrative citation. If the responsible person
refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the refusal to sign shall
not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent
proceedings.
   (B)   Mail. If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible
party, responsible party shall be served by United States mail, addressed to
the person to be notified. Service by mail shall be effective on the date of
deposit in the mail.
   (C)   Posting. The enforcement officer may post the notice conspicuously on
or in front of the property or the affected unit; provided, however, that a
citation issued to an owner of real property must also be mailed to the owner
of the property as shown on the last equalized county assessment roll.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.060 CONTENTS OF CITATION.
   (A)   Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name of the responsible party and known mailing address;
      (2)   Date, approximate time and address or definite description of the
location where the violation(s) was/were observed;
      (3)   The code section(s) violated and a description of the violation(s);
      (4)   The amount of fine for the violation(s);
      (5)   An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by
which it shall be paid;
      (6)   Identification of rights to a hearing, including the time within
which the hearing may be requested; and
      (7)   The name and signature of the code enforcement officer, or other
authorized officer, issuing the citation.
   (B)   If the violation is one which is continuing, an order to correct the
violation and an explanation of consequences for failing to correct the
violation shall be issued concurrently with the citation. Failure to issue the
order to correct or explanation of consequences for failure to correct
violations shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of
subsequent proceedings.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.070 SATISFACTION OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person must:
      (1)   Pay the fine to the city within 15 days from the issue date of the
administrative citation; or
      (2)   File a request for hearing pursuant to §
9.92.080.
   (B)   Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct
the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city.
Payment of the fine waives the responsible party’s right to the administrative
citation hearing and appeal process.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.080 REQUEST FOR HEARING ON AN ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   (A)   How to file a proper and timely request for hearing. Any recipient of
an administrative citation may contest the citation by completing a request for
hearing form and returning it to the City Clerk within 15 days from the date
the citation is served or deemed to have been served. A failure to file a
timely request for hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing
on the citation and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. Proper filing
of a request for hearing must also include payment to the City Clerk of the
appeal fee as established or amended from time to time by resolution of the
Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   Selection of hearing officer. The City Manager shall select a
qualified person to serve as administrative hearing officer to preside over
hearings under this chapter. Hearing officers must be selected in a manner that
avoids the potential for pecuniary or other bias. For purposes of this section,
QUALIFIED PERSON includes an individual with a background in the practice of
law or with a background in local governance, that is particularly experienced
or knowledgeable about the subject matter at issue or that is otherwise deemed
qualified by the City Manager.
   (C)   Hearing procedure.
      (1)   No hearing to contest an administrative citation before the
administrative hearing officer shall be held unless and until a request for
hearing form has been completed and submitted to the City Clerk’s office.
      (2)   After receipt of the request for hearing form, a hearing before the
administrative hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than 15
days and not more than 60 days from the date that the request for hearing is
filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless the parties
waive such time limits. The failure to hold the hearing within this time period
does not invalidate any action of the administrative hearing officer. The
appellant shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least
ten calendar days prior to the date of hearing.
      (3)   At the hearing, the administrative hearing officer must hear and
consider the testimony of the appellant, respondent and their witnesses, as
well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons. The administrative
hearing officer must ensure that parties receive a fair hearing and are
afforded due process in accordance with the applicable state and federal law
governing such hearings.
      (4)   The responsible party may bring an interpreter to the hearing at
his or her sole expense. The city may, at its discretion, record the hearing by
stenographer, court reporter, audio recording or video recording.
      (5)   The appellant shall be given the opportunity to testify and present
evidence concerning the administrative citation. Each party shall have the
opportunity to cross-examine witnesses and present relevant evidence in support
of that party’s case.
      (6)   Administrative hearings are intended to be informal in nature. The
formal rules of evidence shall not apply. Other than copies of citations,
notices, orders and inspection reports served on the responsible parties as
part of the enforcement action giving rise to the hearing, no pre-hearing
discovery is required.
   (D)   Proof. The city bears the burden of proof at an administrative hearing
to establish the existence of a violation of the municipal code and the
responsible party’s responsibility for such violation. The administrative
citation and any additional documents submitted by the enforcement officer
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in
those documents. The standard of proof to be used by the administrative hearing
officer in deciding the issues at an administrative hearing is by a
preponderance of the evidence.
   (E)   Continuance. The administrative hearing officer, before or during a
hearing, may grant a request for a continuance, in his or her discretion, for
good cause; however, in no event may the hearing be continued for more than 30
calendar days without stipulation by all parties.
   (F)   Failure to appear. Any person who has filed a “request for hearing”
form and has been notified of the time and date for a hearing pursuant to this
chapter who does not appear at said hearing shall be deemed to have waived the
right to be present at the hearing and the hearing shall proceed in his or her
absence.
   (G)   Administrative hearing officer’s decision. After considering all of
the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the administrative hearing
officer must issue a written decision within 30 business days of the hearing.
Failure of the administrative hearing officer to render a decision within this
time period does not invalidate any action of the administrative hearing
officer. The decision shall include the reasons for the decision, any
conditions pertaining to the correction of the violation(s) and any time limits
set for said corrections.
      (1)   The administrative hearing officer’s decision must contain the
following statement: “The decision of the hearing officer is final and binding.
Judicial review of this decision is subject to the provisions and time limits
set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6 et seq.”
      (2)   The administrative hearing order must be served on all parties by
mail. The effective date of the decision shall be the mailing date of the
written decision to the applicant.
      (3)   If the hearing officer determines the administrative citation
should be upheld, then any fine amount on deposit with the city shall be
retained by the city. If the hearing officer determines the administrative
citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the city, then the
city shall refund the amount of the deposited fine.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.090 FAILURE TO PAY FINES.
   (A)   Any person who fails to pay to the city any fine imposed pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter on or before the date that fine is due is liable
for the payment of any applicable interest charges.
   (B)   The delinquent obligation shall bear interest at a rate of 10% per
year. Interest shall be calculated on a prorated monthly basis from the date
such obligation becomes delinquent to the date it is paid.
   (C)   The city may collect any delinquent administrative citation fines or
interest charges by use of all available legal means, including personal
collection from the responsible parties.
   (D)   The city also may recover all administrative costs, expenses and fees,
including attorneys’ fees, associated with the assessment, enforcement,
processing and collection of the fines associated with the administrative
citation in accordance with the provisions of this code.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019; Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.100 PUBLICATION AND AVAILABILITY OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Any rules and regulations promulgated for the conduct of administrative
adjudication hearings shall be published and kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk, where they shall be available to the public for inspection and
copying at nominal rates during normal business hours.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.110 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.120 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.130 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.140 DISPOSITION OF FINES.
   All fines and other monies paid to the city in accordance with this article
shall be remitted to the city.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.150 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.160 ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the authority of the
administrative hearing officer to conduct administrative hearings in accordance
with this chapter shall not preclude the city from seeking any remedies for
code or ordinance violations through the use of any other administrative
procedure or court proceeding.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.170 APPLICABILITY OF ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the ordinances of the city or
this code, all provisions of this code or ordinances may be enforced by
instituting an administrative adjudication hearing with the administrative
hearing officer as provided in this article.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the ordinances of the city or
this code, any enforcement action, including, but not limited to, license or
permit suspension or revocation, which may be exercised by another department
of the city may also be exercised by the administrative hearing officer as
provided in this article.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019; Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.180 RIGHT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any decision of the administrative hearing officer is final, subject to
judicial review. Within 20 days after service of the decision of the
administrative hearing officer upon the party to the administrative
adjudication hearing, that person may seek judicial review of the decision by
filing an appeal with the Superior Court of the State of California, in the
County of San Bernardino, in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code, § 53069.4. The
appealing party must serve upon the City Clerk, either in person or by first
class mail, a copy of the notice of appeal. If the appealing party fails to
timely file a notice of appeal, the hearing officer’s decision is deemed
confirmed.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019; Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.92.190 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable and, if any sentence, section
or other part of this chapter should be found to be invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect the remaining provisions, and the remaining provisions shall
continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. MC-1148, passed 8-5-2003)
CHAPTER 9.93: ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES
Section
   
9.93.010   Purpose and intent
   
9.93.015   Definitions
   
9.93.020   Administrative civil penalties
   
9.93.030   Administrative civil penalties notice and order; procedures
   
9.93.035   Service of notices
   
9.93.040   Determination of administrative civil penalties
   
9.93.050   Administrative costs
   
9.93.060   Right to hearing on administrative civil penalties notice and order
   
9.93.070   Administrative hearing; declaration of purpose
   
9.93.080   Administrative hearing; request and notice
   
9.93.090   Appointment and qualifications of administrative hearing officer
   
9.93.100   Recusal of administrative hearing officer
   
9.93.110   Powers of administrative hearing officer
   
9.93.120   Administrative hearing; procedures
   
9.93.130   Failure to attend administrative hearing
   
9.93.140   Administrative hearing order
   
9.93.145   Liability of responsible parties
   
9.93.150   Failure to comply with the administrative hearing order
   
9.93.160   Judicial review
   
9.93.170   Collection of unpaid administrative citation fines, administrative
civil penalties and administrative costs
   
9.93.180   Severability
   
9.93.190   CEQA exemption
   
9.93.200   Administrative adjudication procedures not exclusive
§ 9.93.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The Mayor and City Council have determined that the enforcement of the
municipal code throughout the city is an important public service and is vital
to the protection of the public’s health, safety and quality of life. The Mayor
and City Council have determined a need for alternative methods of code
enforcement and that a comprehensive code enforcement system uses a combination
of judicial and administrative remedies to gain compliance with code
regulations. The Mayor and City Council find a need to draft precise
regulations that can be effectively applied in judicial and administrative
proceedings and further finds that there is a need to establish uniform
procedures for the proper application of administrative code enforcement
remedies and administrative hearings to resolve administrative code enforcement
cases and appeals.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.015 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS. All costs incurred by or on behalf of the city from
the first discovery of the violation of the municipal code through the appeal
process and until compliance is achieved, including, but not limited to, staff
time in investigating the violation, inspecting the property where the
violation occurred, preparing investigation reports, sending notices, preparing
for and attending any appeal hearing, attorneys’ fees and fees paid to the
administrative hearing officer. ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS shall not mean the
administrative civil penalties assessed pursuant to this chapter.
ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS shall not mean late payment charges that accrue, or
collection costs incurred, as a result of unpaid administrative civil
penalties.
   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER. Any person assigned by the City Manager to
preside at administrative hearings.
   CITY MANAGER. The San Bernardino City Manager, or his or her designee
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any code enforcement officer or other city employee or
agent of the city with the authority to enforce any provision of the municipal
code.
   PERSON. Any natural person or entity, including, but not limited to, any
corporation, company, partnership, association, trust or any other form of
business entity.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Includes, but is not limited to, any of the following:
      (1)   A person who causes a code violation to occur;
      (2)   A person who maintains or allows a code violation to continue, by
his or her action or failure to act;
      (3)   A person whose agent, employee or independent contractor causes a
code violation by his or her action or failure to act;
      (4)   A person who is an owner, a lessee or sub-lessee, with the current
right of possession, of real property where a property related code violation
occurs or exists; and
      (5)   If the person or persons are a business entity, the manager or on-
site supervisor where the violation exists shall also be a RESPONSIBLE PARTY.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.020 ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any responsible party who violates any provision of the municipal code
may be subject to the assessment of administrative civil penalties payable to
the city, or its authorized vendor for receipt of payment, pursuant to the
administrative procedures provided in this chapter.
   (B)   The assessment of administrative civil penalties established in this
chapter is in addition to any other administrative or judicial (civil or
criminal) remedy established by law which may be pursued to address any
violation of the municipal code.
   (C)   For the purposes of assessing administrative civil penalties, each and
every day a violation of any provision of the municipal code exists shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation.
   (D)   Administrative civil penalties may be directly assessed by issuance of
an administrative civil penalties notice and order issued by an enforcement
officer, as provided in this chapter.
   (E)   Administrative civil penalties for violations of any provision of the
municipal code shall be assessed at a rate of up to $1,000 per violation per
day; however, if applicable, the administrative hearing officer may reduce the
fine in his or her upon a finding of good cause pursuant to the criteria listed
in §
9.93.040. The maximum amount of administrative civil penalties shall not exceed
$100,000 per parcel or structure for any related series of violations.
(Ord. MC-1535, passed 5-6-2020; Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.030 ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES NOTICE AND ORDER; PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Whenever an enforcement officer determines that a violation of one or
more provisions of the municipal code or any code adopted by reference has
occurred or continues to exist, a written administrative civil penalties notice
and order may be issued to the responsible party.
   (B)   The administrative civil penalties notice and order shall identify
laws or code sections violated. The administrative civil penalties notice and
order may describe how each section has been violated.
   (C)   The administrative civil penalties notice and order shall identify the
dates and locations of the violations.
   (D)   The administrative civil penalties notice and order shall establish
the amount of administrative civil penalties. The fine may be fixed for a
single violation or may be daily for continuing violations.
   (E)   The administrative civil penalties notice and order shall identify the
factors used in determining the duration and daily amount of administrative
civil penalties.
   (F)   In the case of continuing violations, there shall be an ongoing
assessment of administrative civil penalties at the daily rate established in
the administrative civil penalties notice and order until the violations are
corrected or until such time that the total amount of administrative civil
penalties reaches the maximum amount allowed by this chapter. For continuing
violations, the administrative civil penalties notice and order shall identify
the date when the civil penalties began to accrue and, if applicable, the date
when the assessment of administrative civil penalties ended.
   (G)   If the enforcement officer determines that the violations are of a
continuing nature, the administrative civil penalties notice and order shall
demand that the responsible party cease and desist from further action causing
the violations and commence and complete all action to correct the outstanding
violations under the guidance of the appropriate city departments.
   (H)   When a violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical or other
similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to
health or safety, the administrative civil penalties notice and order shall
provide that administrative civil penalties shall not be imposed if the
responsible party corrects all of the violations within a reasonable time as
determined by the enforcement officer.
   (I)   The administrative civil penalties notice and order may describe the
remedial actions required to permanently correct any outstanding violations and
establish a time frame for completion.
   (J)   The administrative civil penalties notice and order may enumerate any
other consequences pursuant to this chapter, if the responsible party fails to
comply with the terms and deadlines as prescribed in the administrative civil
penalties notice and order.
   (K)   More than one administrative civil penalties notice and order may be
issued against the same responsible party if they encompass different dates,
separate or different violations or different locations.
   (L)   The administrative civil penalties notice and order shall be served
upon the responsible party by any one of the methods of service as set forth in
§
9.93.035.
   (M)   The administrative civil penalties notice and order shall identify
appropriate hearing procedures as required by this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.035 SERVICE OF NOTICES.
   (A)   Whenever a notice is required to be given under this chapter, the
notice shall be served by any of the following methods unless different
provisions are otherwise specifically stated to apply:
      (1)   Personal service;
      (2)   By United States mail addressed to the person to be notified; or
      (3)   Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property or
the affected unit.
   (B)   Service by mail shall be effective on the date of deposit in the mail.
   (C)   The failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive
any notice served in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity
of any proceedings taken under this chapter.
   (D)   A notice issued to an owner of real property must be mailed to the
owner of the property as shown on the last equalized county assessment roll.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.040 DETERMINATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   In determining the date when administrative civil penalties start to
accrue, an enforcement officer may consider the date when the city first
discovered the violation as evidenced by the issuance of a notice of violation
or any other written correspondence.
   (B)   The assessment of administrative civil penalties shall end when all
corrections or other action required by the administrative civil penalties
notice and order have been completed.
   (C)   (1)   The enforcement officer may assess fines at a rate of up to
$1,000 per violation per day.
      (2)   In determining the amount of the administrative civil penalties at
an administrative hearing, the hearing officer may consider some or all of the
following factors:
         (a)   The duration of the violation;
         (b)   The frequency of recurrence of the violation;
         (c)   The seriousness of the violation;
         (d)   Whether the violation is designated as an infraction, a
misdemeanor or either an infraction or a misdemeanor by the municipal code;
         (e)   The history of the violation;
         (f)   The good faith effort by the responsible party to comply;
         (g)   The economic impact of the penalty on the responsible party; and
         (h)   The impact of the violation upon the community.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.050 ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
   An enforcement officer or administrative hearing officer is authorized to
assess any reasonable administrative costs in addition to the administrative
civil penalties.
§ 9.93.060 RIGHT TO HEARING ON ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES NOTICE AND ORDER.
   The City Manager shall assign an administrative hearing officer and
establish a date, time and place for the administrative hearing in accordance
with this chapter if the responsible party requests a hearing or in the event
of a continuing violation in order for the administrative hearing officer to
determine the amount of the fine for a continuing violation.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.070 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING; DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose and intent of the Mayor and City Council to afford due
process of law to any person who is directly affected by an administrative
enforcement action. Due process procedures are intended to establish a forum to
efficiently, expeditiously and fairly resolve issues raised in any
administrative enforcement action.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.080 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING; REQUEST AND NOTICE.
   (A)   Any responsible party may contest the administrative civil penalties
notice and order by completing a request for administrative hearing form and
returning it to the City Clerk within 15 days from the date the administrative
civil penalties notice and order was served. The request for administrative
hearing must also include payment to the City Clerk of the appeal fee, as
established or amended, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council.
The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall then send a copy of the request
for administrative hearing form to the enforcement officer and the City
Attorney, and assign an administrative hearing officer and schedule a date,
time and place for the hearing.
   (B)   The hearing before the administrative hearing officer shall be set not
less than 15 days and not more than 60 days from the date that the request for
administrative hearing form is filed with the City Clerk unless the parties
waive such time limits. The failure to hold the hearing within this time period
does not invalidate any action of the administrative hearing officer.
   (C)   Written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be
served at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing on the
responsible party, the enforcement officer and the City Attorney.
   (D)   The format and contents of the hearing notice shall be in accordance
with rules and policies promulgated by the City Manager.
   (E)   The notice of hearing shall be served by any of the methods of service
listed in §
9.93.035.
   (F)   A failure to file a timely request for administrative hearing shall be
deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing on the administrative civil penalties
notice and order and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.090 APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER.
   The City Manager must establish procedures for the selection of a qualified
person to serve as administrative hearing officer to preside over hearings
under this chapter. Hearing officers must be selected in a manner that avoids
the potential for pecuniary or other bias. For purposes of this section,
QUALIFIED PERSON includes an individual with a background in the practice of
law or with a background in local governance, that is particularly experienced
or knowledgeable about the subject matter at issue or that is otherwise deemed
qualified by the City Manager.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.100 RECUSAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER.
   The administrative hearing officer must recuse himself or herself from a
matter if he or she determines that any bias or personal embroilment prevents
the administrative hearing officer from rendering fair and impartial decision.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.110 POWERS OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   The administrative hearing officer shall have all powers necessary to
conduct fair and impartial hearings, including, but not limited to, the power
to:
      (1)   Hold conferences for settlement or simplification of the issues;
      (2)   Administer oaths and affirmations;
      (3)   Hear testimony;
      (4)   Rule upon motions, objections and the admissibility of evidence;
      (5)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
      (6)   Regulate the course of the hearing in accordance with this chapter
or other applicable law;
      (7)   Issue a final order which includes findings of fact and conclusions
of law; and
      (8)   Impose administrative civil penalties and assess administrative
costs and issue orders that are consistent with the applicable violation.
   (B)   (1)   At the hearing, the administrative hearing officer must hear and
consider the testimony of the appellant, respondent and their witnesses, as
well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons. The administrative
hearing officer must ensure that parties receive a fair hearing and are
afforded due process in accordance with the applicable state and federal law
governing such hearings.
      (2)   The administrative hearing officer shall only consider evidence
that is relevant to the following issues:
         (a)   Whether a violation of the municipal code existed on the dates
specified in the administrative civil penalties notice and order and whether
the responsible party caused, maintained or permitted said violation; and
         (b)   Whether the amount of the administrative civil penalties is
appropriate for reduction pursuant to the criteria listed in §
9.93.040.
   (C)   The administrative hearing officer, before or during a hearing, may
grant a request for a continuance, in his or her discretion, for good cause;
however, in no event may the hearing be continued for more than 30 calendar
days without stipulation by all parties.
   (D)   The administrative hearing officer has continuing jurisdiction over
the subject matter of an administrative hearing for the purposes of granting a
continuance, ensuring compliance with an administrative hearing order and
modifying an administrative hearing order.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.120 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING; PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Administrative hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal
rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. Other than copies of citations,
notices, orders and inspection reports served on the responsible parties as
part of the enforcement action giving rise to the hearing, no pre-hearing
discovery is required.
   (B)   The city bears the burden of proof at an administrative hearing to
establish the existence of a violation of the municipal code and the
responsible party’s responsibility for such violation. The administrative
citation and any additional documents submitted by the enforcement officer
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in
those documents.
   (C)   The standard of proof to be used by the administrative hearing officer
in deciding the issues at an administrative hearing is by a preponderance of
the evidence.
   (D)   Each party shall have the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses and
present relevant evidence in support of that party’s case.
   (E)   The responsible party may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his
or her sole expense. The city may, at its discretion, record the hearing by
stenographer, court reporter, audio recording or video recording.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.130 FAILURE TO ATTEND ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   Any responsible party whose property or actions are the subject of an
administrative hearing and who fails to appear at the hearing shall be deemed
to have waived his or her right to a hearing and the adjudication of the issues
related to the hearing, and shall be deemed to have failed to exhaust his or
her administrative remedies; provided that proper notice of the hearing as
required by this chapter has been provided.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.140 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING ORDER.
   (A)   Within 30 business days after the presentation of all evidence and
testimony, including any relevant evidence and testimony presented by the
responsible party, the administrative hearing officer shall issue an
administrative hearing order which affirms or rejects the administrative civil
penalties notice and order or which modifies the daily rate or duration of the
administrative civil penalties depending upon the review of the evidence and
application of the criteria in §
9.93.040. Failure of the administrative hearing officer to render a decision
within this time period does not invalidate any action of the administrative
hearing officer. The administrative hearing officer’s decision must be in
writing and must set forth the administrative hearing officer’s findings of
fact and conclusions of law. The administrative hearing officer may increase or
decrease the total amount of civil penalties and costs that were assessed by
the administrative civil penalties notice and order upon a showing of good
cause and in consideration of the factors listed in §
9.93.040.
   (B)   The administrative hearing officer may issue an administrative hearing
order that requires the responsible party to cease from violating the municipal
code and to make necessary corrections.
   (C)   As part of the administrative hearing order, the administrative
hearing officer may establish specific deadlines for the payment of civil
penalties and costs and condition the total or partial assessment of
administrative civil penalties on the responsible party’s compliance by
specified deadlines.
   (D)   The administrative hearing officer may issue an administrative hearing
order which imposes additional administrative civil penalties that will
continue to be assessed until the responsible party complies with the
administrative hearing officer’s decision and corrects the violation.
   (E)   The administrative hearing officer may schedule subsequent review
hearings as may be necessary or as requested by a party to the hearing to
ensure compliance with the administrative hearing order.
   (F)   The administrative hearing order shall be served on all parties by any
one of the methods listed in §
9.93.035.
   (G)   The administrative hearing order must contain the following statement:
“The decision of the hearing officer is final and binding. Judicial review of
this decision is subject to the provisions and time limits set forth in
California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6 et seq.” The administrative
hearing order shall become final on the date of service of the order, unless
any party files a written request for reconsideration or modification with the
City Manager within 15 days after the date of service of the order.
   (H)   A request for reconsideration or modification of an administrative
hearing order may only be based upon an error of law or new evidence not
available to the requesting party at the time of the administrative hearing.
The decision of the administrative hearing officer on the request for
reconsideration or modification shall become final on the date of service of
the decision by any one of the methods listed in §
9.93.035.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.145 LIABILITY OF RESPONSIBLE PARTIES.
   Any responsible party whose property or actions are the subject of an
administrative hearing and who fails to appear at the hearing shall be deemed
to have waived his or her right to a hearing and the adjudication of the issues
related to the hearing, and shall be deemed to have failed to exhaust his or
her administrative remedies; provided that proper notice of the hearing as
required by this chapter has been provided.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.150 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THE ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING ORDER.
   (A)   Upon the failure of the responsible party to comply with terms and
deadlines set forth in the administrative hearing order, the enforcement
officer may use all appropriate legal means to recover the administrative civil
penalties and administrative costs and obtain compliance with the
administrative hearing order.
   (B)   After the administrative hearing officer issues an administrative
hearing order, the enforcement officer shall monitor the violations and
determine compliance.
   (C)   It is unlawful for a party to an administrative hearing, who has been
served with a copy of the final administration hearing order pursuant to this
chapter, to fail to comply with the order. Failure to comply with a final
administrative hearing order, except for non-payment of administrative civil
penalties, may be prosecuted as an infraction or misdemeanor at the discretion
of the City Attorney.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.160 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   (A)   The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be final and
conclusive and shall not be subject to appeal to the Mayor and City Council.
Once an administrative hearing order becomes final as provided in this chapter,
the time in which judicial review of the order must be sought shall be governed
by Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, § 1094.6 or other applicable state law.
   (B)   The appealing party must serve upon the City Clerk, either in person
or by first class mail, a copy of the notice of appeal.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 9.93.170 COLLECTION OF UNPAID ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION FINES, ADMINISTRATIVE
CIVIL PENALTIES AND ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
   Unpaid administrative civil penalties and administrative costs shall be a
debt to the city and subject to all remedies for debt collection as allowed by
law.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
 
§ 9.93.180 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any sentence, section
or other part of this chapter should be found to be invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect the remaining provisions, and the remaining provisions shall
continue in full force and effect.
§ 9.93.190 CEQA EXEMPTION.
   The adoption of this chapter is exempt from the provisions of the California
Environmental Quality Act, pursuant to § 15061(b)(3) of the Guidelines for
Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act (Title 15, Cal. Code
of Regulations, commencing with § 15000), as it can be seen with certainty that
there is no possibility that the activity will have a significant effect on the
environment.
(Ord. MC-1268, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 9.93.200 ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the authority of the
administrative hearing officer to conduct administrative hearings in accordance
with this chapter shall not preclude the city from seeking any remedies for
code or ordinance violations through the use of any other administrative
procedure or court proceeding.
(Ord. MC-1553, passed 2-17-2021)
CHAPTER 9.94: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND APPEALS
Section
   
9.94.010   Definitions
   
9.94.020   Purpose
   
9.94.030   Scope
   
9.94.040   Hearing officer - selection and qualifications
   
9.94.050   Powers and duties of hearing officer
   
9.94.060   Right to appeal; consequence of an untimely or incomplete appeal
   
9.94.070   Administrative hearings - notice procedures
   
9.94.080   Administrative hearings - conduct of hearing
   
9.94.090   Decision of the hearing officer
   
9.94.100   Methods of service
   
9.94.110   Costs
   
9.94.120   Judicial review
   
9.94.130   Limitation on jurisdiction
   
9.94.140   Severability
§ 9.94.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTION. An act or decision by an administrative officer or administrative
agency for which a right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter is
granted in this code.
   ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY. An organ of the city government, other than the City
Council, which, under the direction of the City Manager, has responsibility for
carrying out or enforcing the rules, regulations and ordinances of the city,
but not including boards and commissions of the city.
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. An officer of the city who is not a member of the
legislative body or appointed boards or commissions. Such officers include, but
are not limited to, the City Manager, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Director of
Planning and Building, Director of Transportation, Director of Public Works or
similar officer.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Any person whose personal, pecuniary or property right or
interest is directly and adversely affected, or upon whom a substantial burden
or obligation is imposed by the action or decision appealed from.
   APPELLANT. Any aggrieved person who files an appeal.
   CODE. The San Bernardino Municipal Code.
   HEARING OFFICER. Any person duly qualified and authorized by this chapter to
hear and review appeals under this chapter.
   RESPONDENT. The administrative officer or agency which took the action
appealed from, and any other administrative officer or agency named as
RESPONDENT in an appeal.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 9.94.020 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose and intent of the City Council to afford due process of
law to any person who is directly affected by an action or decision of an
administrative agency or officer. These procedures are also intended to
establish a forum to efficiently and fairly resolve administrative appeals.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 9.94.030 SCOPE.
   The hearing officer hears appeals from actions taken by an administrative
officer or administrative agency when a right to appeal under the provisions of
this chapter is granted in this code. Except where this code prescribes another
procedure, the rules and procedures pertaining to appeals are as stated herein.
The rules and procedures pertaining to appeals under this chapter may be
supplemented or modified as stated in the chapter that grants a right to appeal
under these provisions. The hearing officer has no authority to hear appeals of
any action taken by the City Council or any other board or commission of the
city.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 9.94.040 HEARING OFFICER - SELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The City Manager must establish procedures for the selection of a
qualified person to serve as hearing officer for each matter appealed under
this chapter. Hearing officers must be selected in a manner that avoids the
potential for pecuniary or other bias.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, QUALIFIED PERSON includes an individual
with a background in the practice of law or with a background in local
governance, that is particularly experienced or knowledgeable about the subject
matter at issue or that is otherwise deemed qualified by the City Manager.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 9.94.050 POWERS AND DUTIES OF HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   As provided by §
9.94.030, the hearing officer hears all appeals in accordance with the
procedures contained in this chapter or as supplemented or modified in the
chapter granting a right to appeal hereunder.
   (B)   The hearing officer is authorized to issue decisions and take all
actions necessary and proper to carry out the functions of the hearing officer
in this chapter, including:
      (1)   Hold conferences for settlement or simplification of the issues;
      (2)   Administer oaths and affirmations;
      (3)   Hear testimony;
      (4) Rule upon motions, objections and the admissibility of evidence;
      (5)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
      (6)   Regulate the course of the hearing in accordance with this chapter
or other applicable law; and
      (7)   Issue a final order which includes findings of fact and conclusions
of law.
   (C)   The hearing officer may request information, services, facilities or
any other assistance for the purpose of furthering the objectives of this
chapter.
   (D)   At the hearing, the hearing officer must hear and consider the
testimony of the appellant, respondent and their witnesses, as well as any
documentary evidence presented by these persons.
   (E)   The hearing officer must ensure that parties receive a fair hearing
and are afforded due process in accordance with the applicable state and
federal law governing such hearings.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 9.94.060 RIGHT TO APPEAL; CONSEQUENCE OF AN UNTIMELY OR INCOMPLETE APPEAL.
   Except where this code prescribes another procedure, the following hearing
request procedures apply to appeals under this chapter.
   (A)   Any aggrieved person may contest an action taken by an administrative
officer of the city, as provided in §
9.94.030, by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15
calendar days. No fee shall be due for the filing of an appeal. The notice of
appeal must also include payment to the City Clerk of the appeal fee, as
established or amended, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   The notice required by division (A) above must be filed no later than
15 days following the date of mailing to appellant of notice of the action from
which the appeal is taken or, if there is no such mailing or none is required,
no later than 15 days following the date of the action that is the subject of
the appeal.
   (C)   A written notice of appeal must contain the following information:
      (1)   The full name, mailing address, e-mail address and telephone number
of each appellant who is appealing the action;
      (2)   A description of the specific action or decision being appealed,
including the date of the action;
      (3)   The grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the hearing
officer to understand the nature of the controversy; and
      (4)   The signature of an appellant.
   (D)   If the City Clerk does not receive a timely notice of appeal, if the
notice of appeal is incomplete or if the notice of appeal does not comply with
all of the requirements set forth in this section, the right to appeal the
action is waived. In this event, the action is final and binding. A failure to
file a timely or proper notice of appeal also constitutes a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 9.94.070 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS - NOTICE PROCEDURES.
   Except where this code prescribes another procedure, the following hearing
notice procedures apply to appeals under this chapter.
   (A)   No hearing before a hearing officer under this chapter may be
scheduled or held unless a timely and proper notice of appeal has been
submitted to the City Clerk as set forth in §
9.94.060.
   (B)   The City Clerk must schedule the hearing no sooner than 15 days and no
later than 60 days from receipt of the notice of appeal, unless the parties
waive such time limits. The failure to hold the hearing within this time period
does not invalidate any action of the hearing officer.
   (C)   The City Clerk must provide a copy of the appeal to the respondent
within five days after filing.
   (D)   The City Clerk must notify the appellant, respondent and City Attorney
in writing of the date, time and location of the hearing at least 15 days
before the date of the hearing.
   (E)   Failure to receive notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
not dismiss any violation at issue or invalidate any action of the hearing
officer, if the notice was given in the manner stated in division (D) above.
   (F)   The notice of hearing may be served by any of the methods of service
listed in §
9.94.100.
   (G)   Unless the notice of appeal names some other respondent, the
administrative officer or administrative agency that took the action or made
the decision being appealed is designated the “respondent.”
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 9.94.080 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS - CONDUCT OF HEARING.
   (A)   Participation. The hearing officer must be present at all times to
preside over the hearing. All hearings are open to the public. The respondent,
or another city representative, is required to participate in the hearing. The
appellant is required to participate in the hearing.
   (B)   Evidence, witnesses and discovery. All parties have the right to
present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The formal rules of evidence and
discovery do not apply. The rules of privilege are effective to the same extent
that they are now or hereafter may be recognized in civil actions. Irrelevant
and unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded. Oral evidence may be taken
only on oath or affirmation. The appellant and respondent may represent
themselves or be represented by anyone of their choice.
   (C)   Cross-examination. No party shall have the right to cross-examine any
other party or witness except for good cause shown to the satisfaction of the
hearing officer. Each party may cross-examine witnesses.
   (D)   Interpretation and recordation. The appellant may bring an interpreter
to the hearing at his or her sole expense. The city may, at its discretion,
record the hearing by stenographer, court reporter, audio recording or video
recording.
   (E)   Subpoenas. In any hearing conducted by the hearing officer, he or she
has the power to compel the attendance of witnesses for the production of
evidence by subpoenas issued under the authority of the City Council and
attested by the City Clerk. Subpoenas may also be issued at the request of the
parties prior to the commencement of such hearing. No subpoena may be issued
for any reason without the concurrence of the City Attorney that there is good
cause for such subpoena to be issued and such subpoena is approved by the City
Council. It is the duty of the Chief of Police to cause all such subpoenas to
be served, and the refusal of a person to attend or to testify in answer to
such a subpoena subjects the person to prosecution in the same manner set forth
by law for failure to appear before the City Council in response to a subpoena
issued by the City Council.
   (F)   Proof. The standard of proof applicable to the hearing and to be used
by the hearing officer in deciding the issue on appeal is proof by a
preponderance of the evidence. The respondent bears the burden of proof at the
hearing. The hearing officer determines relevancy, weight and credibility of
testimony and evidence.
   (G)   Continuances. The hearing officer, before or during a hearing, may
grant a request for a continuance, in his or her discretion, for good cause;
however, in no event may the hearing be continued for more than 30 calendar
days without stipulation by all parties.
   (H)   Failure of appellant to appear. If the appellant fails to appear at
the hearing, the hearing officer may cancel the hearing and send a notice
thereof to the appellant to the address stated on the appeal form. A
cancellation of a hearing due to non-appearance of the appellant waives the
right to appeal and is failure to exhaust all administrative remedies; provided
that proper notice of the hearing as required by this chapter has been
provided. In such instances, the action is final and binding.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 9.94.090 DECISION OF THE HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   The hearing officer must render his or her decision in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, applicable law and all ordinances of this city.
   (B)   The hearing officer’s decision must be in writing and must set forth
the hearing officer’s findings of fact and conclusions of law.
   (C)   The hearing officer must render a decision within 15 days following
the conclusion of the hearing. Failure of the hearing officer to render a
decision within this time period does not invalidate any action of the hearing
officer.
   (D)   The hearing officer’s decision must be served on all parties in
accordance with §
9.94.100. Failure of a person to receive a properly-served decision does not
affect the finality or effectiveness of the decision.
   (E)   The hearing officer’s decision is the final administrative decision of
the city regarding the action that is the subject of the appeal. The hearing
officer’s decision is effective on the date of service of the decision. The
decision must contain the following statement: “The decision of the hearing
officer is final and binding. Judicial review of this decision is subject to
the provisions and time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure
section 1094.6 et seq.”
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 9.94.100 METHODS OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Except where this code prescribes another procedure, any notice or
document required to be served under this chapter must be served by personal
service or first class mail.
   (B)   Service is deemed effective on the date it is personally delivered or
mailed.
   (C)   Failure of any person to receive a document properly served under this
chapter does not affect the validity of the notice or document, service or any
action or proceeding under this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 9.94.110 COSTS.
   Nothing herein limits the city’s ability to seek recovery of its costs or
fees incurred in connection with the hearing if authorized by law. The city
shall keep an accounting of the hearing costs. If any portion of the action is
upheld, even in part, the city is the prevailing party.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 9.94.120 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   The decision of the hearing officer is not subject to appeal to the City
Council or any board or commission of the city. Once the hearing officer’s
decision becomes final as provided in this chapter, the appellant must both
bring judicial action to contest such decision and provide the city with a
notice of the action within 90 days after the date of such decision of the
hearing officer, in accordance with the Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, § 1094.6.
Failure to do so means all objections to the hearing officer’s decision are
waived.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 9.94.130 LIMITATION ON JURISDICTION.
   The hearing officer shall not consider appeals of orders, decisions and
determinations of the City Building Official relating to the building standards
of the California Building Standards Code, which must be considered by the
Building Appeals Board, pursuant to §
2.45.030.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 9.94.140 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable, and, if any sentence, section
or other part of this chapter should be found to be invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect the remaining provisions, and the remaining provisions shall
continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
ARTICLE IX. NARCOTICS AND GANGS
CHAPTER 9.95: NARCOTICS AND GANG-RELATED CRIME EVICTION PROGRAM
Section
   
9.95.010   Definitions
   
9.95.020   Duties of the landlord
   
9.95.030   Administrative procedures
   
9.95.040   Recovery of possession by landlord
   
9.95.050   Enforcement
   
9.95.060   Penalties
   
9.95.070   Civil remedies available
   
9.95.080   Severability
§ 9.95.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any drug, substance or immediate precursor, as listed
in the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Cal. Health and Safety
Code, §§ 11000 et seq.
   DRUG-RELATED NUISANCE. Any activity related to the possession, sale, use or
manufacture of a controlled substance that creates an unreasonable interference
with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property and/or safety of residents of
the premises. Such activity includes, but is not limited to, any activity
commonly associated with illegal drug dealing, such as noise; steady traffic
day and night to a particular unit; barricaded units; the display or observance
of weapons; drug loitering, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11532;
or other drug-related occurrences which, taken as a whole, tend to
substantially affect or interfere with any tenant’s beneficial use and
enjoyment of any rented property.
   GANG-RELATED CRIME. The commission of any of the offenses listed in Cal.
Penal Code, § 186.22(e) in which the perpetrator is a known member of a gang or
any crime motivated by gang membership in which the victim or the intended
victim of the crime is a known member of a gang. The term gang is as defined in
Cal. Penal Code, § 186.22(f).
   ILLEGAL DRUG ACTIVITY. A violation of any of the provisions of the Cal.
Health and Safety Code, Chapter 6 (commencing with § 11350) or Chapter 6.5
(commencing with § 11400), or any successor provisions thereto.
   LANDLORD. Any owner of record, lessor or sub-lessor (including any person,
firm, corporation, partnership, association of persons or other entity) who
receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use of any rental unit, or the
agent, manager, representative or successor of any of the foregoing.
   PREMISES. Any rental unit and the land on which it and any other buildings
of a complex are located and common areas, including, but not limited to,
garage facilities, streets, alleyways, stairwells, elevators and, as the
context permits or requires, any public or private property which is
immediately adjacent to any of said areas.
   RENTAL UNIT. Any dwelling, including, but not limited to, any single- and
multi-family residence, duplex and/or condominium in the City of San
Bernardino. This term shall also include any mobile home, whether rent is paid
for the mobile home, the land upon which the mobile home is located or both. It
shall also mean any recreational vehicle, as defined in Cal. Civil Code, §
799.29, if located in a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park, whether
rent is paid for the recreation vehicle, the land upon which it is located or
both.
   TENANT. Any tenant, subtenant, lessee, sub-lessee or any person entitled to
use or occupancy of a rental unit, or any other person residing in the rental
unit.
§ 9.95.020 DUTIES OF THE LANDLORD.
   (A)   A landlord shall not cause or knowingly permit any premises under his
or her control to be used or maintained for any illegal drug activity, gang-
related crime or in such manner as to constitute a drug-related nuisance.
   (B)   A landlord shall not cause or knowingly permit any tenant to use or
occupy premises under the landlord’s control, if the tenant commits, permits,
maintains or is involved in any illegal drug activity, gang-related crime or
drug-related nuisance on the premises.
   (C)   A landlord shall, in any lease executed after the effective date of
this chapter, include language as follows or language that is substantially
similar: “During the continuance of this lease, the leased premises will not be
used for any purpose in violation of any federal, state, or municipal statute
or ordinance, or of any regulation, order, or directive of a governmental
agency, as such statutes, ordinances, regulations, orders, or directives now
exist or may exist in the future, concerning the use and safety of the
premises. On the breach of any provision of this lease by lessee, lessor may,
at lessor’s option, terminate this lease immediately and reenter and repossess
the premises.” Failure to include this language or substantially similar
language shall not relieve the landlord of any other duties required under this
chapter, nor shall it be a defense to a prosecution pursuant to this chapter.
§ 9.95.030 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   The Mayor, or his or her designee, may promulgate such administrative
procedures as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter.
§ 9.95.040 RECOVERY OF POSSESSION BY LANDLORD.
   (A)   Grounds for eviction. Notwithstanding any provision of the municipal
code to the contrary, a landlord may bring an action to recover possession of a
rental unit upon any of the following grounds:
      (1)   The tenant is committing or permitting to exist any illegal drug
activity, gang related crime or drug-related nuisance on the premises; or
      (2)   The tenant has been convicted of a crime wherein the underlying
offense involves illegal drug activity, drug-related nuisance activity or a
gang-related crime on the premises.
   (B)   Waiving testimony cost. Notwithstanding the Cal. Gov’t Code, § 68097.2
(b), a public entity may waive all or part of the costs incurred in furnishing
the testimony of a peace officer in an unlawful detainer action brought by a
landlord to recover possession of a rental unit pursuant to this chapter.
§ 9.95.050 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Provided the owner of record or agent thereof, and any known manager,
of a premises have been served with a written notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, advising that the Chief of Police has determined that the
landlord is in violation of §
9.95.020(A), and has failed to comply with the provisions of §
9.95.020(A) within 15 business days of the date of service of said notice, or
to file an appeal within said period as provided herein, then the city may
proceed with enforcement pursuant to this chapter. Notwithstanding enforcement
pursuant to this chapter, the city may proceed with an action for injunctive
relief or utilize any other remedy provided by law to compel compliance,
including, but not limited to, all remedies available to abate a nuisance.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the written notice shall also identify
the offending tenant(s); unit number, if applicable; and the specific violation
(s), and shall state the date(s) and time(s) of any observed criminal activity
and any resulting arrest(s), and shall further state that, as to such tenant
(s), the landlord is required to serve and diligently prosecute either a three-
day notice to quit or a 30-day notice to vacate. The term DILIGENTLY PROSECUTE
shall mean such prosecution by the landlord as is necessary to cause the
subject rental unit to be completely vacated by all tenants who commit, permit,
maintain or are involved in any illegal drug activity gang-related crime or
drug-related nuisance. No such vacated rental unit may be re-rented, leased or
otherwise reoccupied by the prosecuted tenant(s) prior to the expiration of a
12-month period following the vacation of the rental unit by the tenant(s). It
is acknowledged that a tenant, in his or her answer to an unlawful detainer
action, may raise as an affirmative defense a denial that he or she has engaged
in the prohibited conduct. A judicial decision not to order the eviction of a
tenant is a defense to prosecution under this chapter.
   (C)   The required notice shall also state that, within said 15-day period,
the landlord may file a written appeal of the determination of violation with
the City Clerk who shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before the
hearing officer. Written notice of the date and time of said hearing shall be
served by first class mail, addressed to the landlord’s last known business
address. Following the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may
affirm, reverse or reverse subject to conditions the Police Chief’s
determination of violation. The hearing officer’s decision shall be based upon
written findings and shall be final. Any review of the hearing officer’s
decision shall be in accordance with the procedures as set forth in the Cal.
Code of Civil Procedure, § 1094.5.
   (D)   In the event no appeal is timely filed or an appeal is denied, the
city may immediately proceed to enforce the provisions of this chapter against
such landlord by way of criminal enforcement action.
   (E)   The offending tenant(s) shall be served with a written notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested, advising such tenant(s) that the
landlord is being notified of the observed criminal activity and that the
landlord is required to serve and diligently prosecute either a three-day
notice to quit or a 30-day notice to vacate. The required notice shall also
state that within 15 days of the date of the notice, the tenant(s) may file a
written appeal of the determination of violation with the City Clerk who shall
cause the matter to be set for hearing before the hearing officer. Written
notice of the date and time of said hearing shall be served by first class
mail, addressed to the tenant(s) last known address. A decision affirming the
violation by the hearing officer shall not prevent such tenant(s) from
defending any subsequent unlawful detainer action.
§ 9.95.060 PENALTIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to
fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to
comply with any of its requirements shall be punished as follows.
      (1)   For three or less violations occurring within any 12-consecutive
month period, a violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction,
punishable by a fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation, $200 for a
second violation of the same provision within any 12-consecutive month period
and a fine not exceeding $500 for a third violation of the same provision
occurring within any 12-consecutive month period.
      (2)   A fourth violation of the same provision occurring within any 12-
consecutive month period shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or by
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 9.95.070 CIVIL REMEDIES AVAILABLE.
   The violations of any of the provisions of this chapter adopted shall
constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by
means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other
manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.
§ 9.95.080 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or words of this chapter
be rendered or declared invalid by any final court action in a court of
competent jurisdiction, or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the
remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences and words of this chapter
shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. MC-1049, passed 7-8-1999)
CHAPTER 9.96: CRIME-FREE ZONES
Section
   
9.96.010   Purpose
   
9.96.020   Definitions
   
9.96.030   Procedure for establishing a crime-free zone
   
9.96.040   Notice of a crime-free zone
   
9.96.050   Remaining in certain places within the crime-free zone without
consent
   
9.96.060   Supplemental procedure
§ 9.96.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure for the designation
of crime-free zones within the city.
§ 9.96.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CRIME-FREE ZONE. An area that is established pursuant to §
9.96.030.
   DISPERSE. To depart from the designated crime-free zone and not to
reassemble within the crime-free zone with anyone from the group ordered to
depart for the duration of the zone.
   ILLEGAL DRUG. Has the same meaning as the term “controlled substance” in the
Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11007.
   PUBLIC PLACE. The public way and any other location open to the public,
whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, any street,
sidewalk, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground or other
public ground or public building, any common area of a school, hospital,
apartment house, office building, transport facility, shop, privately owned
place of business to which the public is invited, including any place of
amusement, entertainment or eating place. Any PUBLIC PLACE also includes the
front yard area, driveway and walkway of any private residence, business or
apartment house.
§ 9.96.030 PROCEDURE FOR ESTABLISHING A CRIME-FREE ZONE.
   (A)   The City Council may declare any area a crime-free zone by adopting a
resolution setting forth the boundaries of such area.
   (B)   In determining whether to designate a crime-free zone, the City
Council shall consider the following:
      (1)   The occurrence of a disproportionately high number of arrests for
the possession or distribution of illegal drugs, crimes against property,
crimes against persons and other violent crimes in the proposed crime-free
zone;
      (2)   Objective evidence or verifiable information that shows that
illegal drugs are being sold and distributed within the proposed crime-free
zone; and
      (3)   Any other verifiable information from which the Council may
ascertain whether the health and safety of residents who live in the proposed
crime-free zone are endangered by the purchase, sale or use of illegal drugs or
other illegal activity.
§ 9.96.040 NOTICE OF A CRIME-FREE ZONE.
   Upon the designation of a crime-free zone, the city shall mark each block
within the crime-free zone by posting the following information in the
immediate area of, and on the borders around, the crime-free zone:
   (A)   A statement that the area has been designated a crime-free zone;
   (B)   The boundaries of the crime-free zone;
   (C)   A statement of the effective dates of the crime-free zone designation;
and
   (D)   Any other additional notice to inform the public of the crime-free
zone.
§ 9.96.050 REMAINING IN CERTAIN PLACES WITHIN THE CRIME-FREE ZONE WITHOUT
CONSENT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, other than a public officer or employee
acting within the course and scope of his or her employment, to enter or remain
in any public place, as defined in this chapter, or private property, without
the implied or express consent of the owner, his or her agent or person in
lawful possession thereof, or with the knowledge that such consent has been
withdrawn.
   (B)   This section shall not apply in any of the following instances:
      (1)   Where its application is directly related to an act prohibited by
the Unruh Civil Rights Act or other law relating to prohibited discrimination
against any person on account of sex, color, race, religion, creed, ancestry or
national origin;
      (2)   Where its application involves or is directly related to an act
prohibited by the Cal. Penal Code, § 365 or other law relating to the duties of
innkeepers or common carriers; or
      (3)   Where the property described in division (A) above is owned, leased
or operated by the city or any other public entity and is open to the public
and the application of this section would result in an interference or
inhibition of the exercise of constitutionally protected right of freedom of
speech; provided the exercise of such right does not involve prohibited
conduct, including, but not limited to, conduct prohibited by the Cal. Penal
Code, §§ 647 or 415 or any law or ordinance relating to the obstruction of any
street, sidewalk or other public place or place open to the public.
   (C)   Any person violating this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, which,
upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010 except that any person violating this section shall be placed on
summary probation with the term and condition that they stay away from the
crime-free zone.
Statutory reference:
   Unruh Civil Rights Act, see Cal. Civil Code, § 51
§ 9.96.060 SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEDURE.
   The prohibitions set forth in this chapter are supplemental to any similar
prohibitions set forth in state law.
(Ord. MC-1228, passed 7-12-2006)
CHAPTER 9.97: REGULATION OF REGISTERED SEX OFFENDERS
Section
   
9.97.010   Intent and purpose
   
9.97.020   Definition
   
9.97.030   Prohibitions
Editor’s note:
   Ord. MC-1415, passed 7-20-2015 added “Chapter 9.97 Psychoactive Bath Salts,
Psychoactive Herbal Incense and Other Synthetic Drugs” in such a way that might
have supplanted “Chapter 9.97 Regulation of Registered Sex Offenders,” which
was not the intention of the Mayor and City Council. On advice from the City
Attorney, Chapter 9.97 remains “Regulation of Registered Sex Offenders” and
“Psychoactive Bath Salts, Psychoactive Herbal Incense and Other Synthetic
Drugs” has been moved to
Chapter 9.98. This non-substantive change of chapter number is the only change
from Ord. MC-1415.
§ 9.97.010 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council desire to impose safety precautions in
furtherance of the compelling interest of protecting children from registered
sex offenders by restricting registered sex offenders’ access to locations
where children regularly gather. The Mayor and City Council find that
registered sex offenders pose a clear threat to the children residing in or
visiting the community. It is the intent of the restrictions in this chapter to
reduce the threat that registered sex offenders pose to these children by
limiting the ability of registered sex offenders to be in contact with these
children on Halloween, the evening of October 31.
   (B)   Currently, state law does not address the areas that registered sex
offenders can frequent, focusing only on where registered sex offenders can
reside. This chapter is not intended to conflict with, but to supplement, state
law by imposing additional restrictions on the locations where registered sex
offenders may reside, imposing restrictions on the locations where registered
sex offenders may frequent and imposing reasonable time, place and manner
restrictions on registered sex offenders’ contact with children.
(Ord. MC-1380, passed 10-17-2012)
§ 9.97.020 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER. Any person who has been convicted of an offense
against a child and is required to register as a sex offender, pursuant to the
Cal. Penal Code, §§ 290 et seq.
(Ord. MC-1380, passed 10-17-2012)
§ 9.97.030 PROHIBITIONS.
   Any registered sex offender on October 31 of each year shall:
   (A)   Leave all exterior residential, decorative and ornamental lighting at
his or her residence off between 5:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m.;
   (B)   Not decorate or maintain any Halloween decorations on the exterior or
any interior portion of his or her residence that is visible to the public; and
   (C)   Be prohibited from answering the door of his or her residence to
children who are engaging in the practice of asking for treats on Halloween,
commonly called “trick-or-treating.”
(Ord. MC-1380, passed 10-17-2012)
CHAPTER 9.98: PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS, PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE AND OTHER
SYNTHETIC DRUGS
Section
   
9.98.010   Purpose and intent
   
9.98.020   Definitions
   
9.98.030   Provision, sale and/or distribution of synthetic drugs prohibited
   
9.98.040   Provision, sale and/or distribution of substances claimed or
represented to be synthetic drugs prohibited
   
9.98.050   Possession of synthetic drugs prohibited
   
9.98.060   Public nuisance
   
9.98.070   Summary abatement
   
9.98.080   Revocation of business license
   
9.98.090   Penalties
   
9.98.100   Seizure of evidence
   
9.98.110   Exclusions
   
9.98.120   Severability
Editor’s note:
   Ord. MC-1415, passed 7-20-2015 added “Chapter 9.97 Psychoactive Bath Salts,
Psychoactive Herbal Incense and Other Synthetic Drugs” in such a way that might
have supplanted “Chapter 9.97 Regulation of Registered Sex Offenders,” which
was not the intention of the Mayor and City Council. On advice from the City
Attorney, Chapter 9.97 remains “Regulation of Registered Sex Offenders” and
“Psychoactive Bath Salts, Psychoactive Herbal Incense and Other Synthetic
Drugs” has been moved to
Chapter 9.98. This non-substantive change of chapter number is the only change
from Ord. MC-1415.
§ 9.98.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   Recreational use of psychoactive bath salts, psychoactive herbal incense and
similar products commonly known as “synthetic drugs” has been documented to
cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal
ideation, cannibalism and death. While state and federal laws and regulations
prohibit some synthetic drugs, the makers of these drugs continually alter the
composition of the compounds in their products so as to escape the purview of
these laws and regulations. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to
provide the city with reasonable measures to address the dangers to the
community posed by synthetic drugs that are not regulated by state or federal
law.
(Ord. MC-1415, passed 7-20-2015)
§ 9.98.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSUME, CONSUMING or CONSUMPTION. To ingest, inhale, inject, smoke or snort
(insufflate).
   DISTRIBUTE, DISTRIBUTING or DISTRIBUTION. To furnish, give away, exchange,
transfer, deliver or supply, whether for monetary gain or not.
   PERSON. Any natural person, business, firm, company, corporation, public
corporation, club, trust, partnership, association and/or similar organization.
   POSSESS, POSSESSING or POSSESSION. To have for consumption, distribution or
sale in one’s actual or constructive custody or control, or under one’s
authority or power, whether such custody, control, authority and/or power be
exercised solely or jointly with others.
   PROVIDE, PROVIDING or PROVISION. Offering to distribute or sell a product or
substance to any person.
   PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS.
      (1)   Any crystalline or powder product that contains a synthetic
chemical compound that, when consumed, elicits psychoactive or psychotropic
stimulant effects. The term PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS includes without
limitation:
         (a)   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant
effects and contain any of the following intoxicating chemical compounds:
            1.   Cathinone (2-amino-1-phenyl- 1-propanone), 4-
methylmethcathinone (2- methylamino-1-(4-methylphenyl) propan-1-one), 4-
methoxymethcathinone (1-(4-methoxyphenyl)-2- (methylamino) propan-1-one), MDPV
(methylenedioxypyrovalerone), MDMA (3,4- methylenedioxy-N-methylamphetamine),
methylone (3,4-methylenedioxy-N-methylcathinone), methcathinone (2-
(methylamino)-1-phenyl-propan-1- one), flephedrone (4-fluoromethcathinone), 3-
FMC (3-fluoromethcathinone), ethcathinone (2-ethylamino- 1-phenyl-propan-1-
one), butylone (-keto-N- methylbenzodioxolylbutanamine), a-PPP (-
pyrrolidinopropiophenone), MPPP (4’-methyl- pyrrolidinopropiophenone), MDPPP
(3’,4’- methylenedioxy-pyrrolidinopropiophenone), -PVP (1- phenyl-2-(1-
pyrrolidinyl)-1-pentanone) or naphyrone (1-naphthalen-2-yl-2-pyrrolidin-1-
ylpentan-1-one);
            2.   Any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical
compounds;
            3.   Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical
structure similar to the above listed compounds;
            4.   Any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating
chemical compounds; or
            5.   Any other substantially similar chemical structure or
compound.
         (b)   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant
effects and are marketed under any of the following trade names: Bliss,
Blizzard, Blue Silk, Bonzai Grow, Charge Plus, Charlie, Cloud Nine, Euphoria,
Hurricane, Ivory Snow, Ivory Wave, Lunar Wave, Ocean, Ocean Burst, Pixie Dust,
Posh, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Red Dove, Scarface, Snow Leopard, Stardust,
Vanilla Sky, White Dove, White Night and White Lightning.
      (2)   The term PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS shall not include any product,
substance, material, compound, mixture or preparation that is specifically
excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (“UCSA”) (Cal.
Health and Safety Code, §§ 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA’s
schedules of controlled substances (Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§ 11053
through 11059); regulated by one of the UCSA’s Synthetic Drug Laws (Cal. Health
and Safety Code, §§ 11357.5, 11375.5 and 11401); regulated by the Controlled
Substances Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 801 et seq.); or approved by the Food and Drug
Administration (“FDA”).
   PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE.
      (1)   Any organic product consisting of plant material that contains a
synthetic stimulant compound that, when consumed, elicits psychoactive or
psychotropic euphoric effects. The term PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE includes,
without limitation:
         (a)   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric
effects and contain any of the following intoxicating chemical compounds:
            1.   Cannabicyclohexanol (2- [(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-
methylnonan-2- yl) phenol), JWH-018 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol- 3-yl)
methanone), JWH-073 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1- butylindol-3-yl) methanone), JWH-200 (
(1-(2- morpholin-4-ylethyl) indol-3-yl)-naphthalen-1- ylmethanone), HU-210 (
(6aR,10aR)-9- (Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2- yl)-6a, 7, 10,
10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol), CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-
hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-)2- methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-
hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol) or AM-2201 (1-[(5-
fluoropentyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]- (naphthalen-1-yl) methanone);
            2.   Any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical
compounds;
            3.   Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical
structure similar to the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds;
            4.   Any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating
chemical compounds; or
            5.   Any other substantially similar chemical structure or
compound.
         (b)   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric
effects and are marketed under any of the following trade names: K2, K3, Spice,
Genie, Smoke, Potpourri, Buzz, Spice 99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery,
Earthquake, Black Mamba, Stinger, Ocean Blue, Stinger, Serenity, Fake Weed and
Black Mamba.
      (2)   The term PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE shall not include any product,
substance,  material, compound, mixture or preparation that is specifically
excepted by the UCSA (Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§ 11000 et seq.), listed in
one of the UCSA’s schedules of controlled substances (Cal. Health and Safety
Code, §§ 11053 through 11059); regulated by one of the UCSA’s Synthetic Drug
Laws (Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§ 11357.5, 11375.5 and 11401); regulated by
the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 801 et seq.); or approved by the
FDA.
   PSYCHOACTIVE OR PSYCHOTROPIC EUPHORIC EFFECTS. Affecting the central nervous
system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition
and/or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cannabis.
   PSYCHOACTIVE OR PSYCHOTROPIC STIMULANT EFFECTS. Affecting the central
nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness,
cognition and/or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cocaine,
methylphenidate or amphetamines.
   SELL, SELLING or SALE. To furnish, exchange, transfer, deliver or supply for
monetary gain.
   SYNTHETIC DRUG. Shall include psychoactive bath salts and psychoactive
herbal incense, as those terms are defined hereinabove.
(Ord. MC-1415, passed 7-20-2015)
§ 9.98.030 PROVISION, SALE AND/OR DISTRIBUTION OF SYNTHETIC DRUGS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to claim or represent that a product
that person is providing, distributing or selling is a synthetic drug within
the city.
   (B)   Merely disclaiming a synthetic drug as “not safe for human
consumption” will not avoid the application of the section.
(Ord. MC-1415, passed 7-20-2015)
§ 9.98.040 PROVISION, SALE AND/OR DISTRIBUTION OF SUBSTANCES CLAIMED OR
REPRESENTED TO BE SYNTHETIC DRUGS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to claim or represent that a product
that person is providing, distributing or selling is a synthetic drug within
the city.
   (B)   To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a product is
a synthetic drug, the enforcing officer may consider any of the following
evidentiary factors:
      (1)   The product is not suitable for its marketed use (such as
crystalline or powder product being marketed as “glass cleaner”);
      (2)   The business providing, distributing or selling the product does
not typically provide, distribute or sell products that are used for that
product’s marketed use (such as a liquor store selling “plant food”);
      (3)   The product contains a warning label that is not typically present
on products that are used for that product’s marketed use (such as “not for
human consumption,” “not for purchase by minors” or “does not contain chemicals
banned by the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11357.5”);
      (4)   The product is significantly more expensive than products that are
used for that product’s marketed use (such as one-half of a gram of a substance
marketed as “glass cleaner” costing $50);
      (5)   The product resembles an illicit street drug (such as cocaine,
methamphetamine or marijuana); or
      (6)   The product’s name or packaging uses images or slang referencing an
illicit street drug (such as “Eight Ballz” or “Green Buddha”).
   (C)   Merely disclaiming a substance claimed or represented to be a
synthetic drug as “not safe for human consumption” will not avoid the
application of this section.
(Ord. MC-1415, passed 7-20-2015)
§ 9.98.050 POSSESSION OF SYNTHETIC DRUGS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to possess any synthetic drug within the city.
(Ord. MC-1415, passed 7-20-2015)
§ 9.98.060 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, distribute or sell
any synthetic drug within the city.
   (B)   It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision,
distribution or sale of any synthetic drug on property owned, controlled or
managed by such person within the city.
   (C)   It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, distribute or sell
any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug within the city.
   (D)   It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision,
distribution or sale of any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic
drug on property owned, controlled or managed by such person within the city.
   (E)   To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a substance
or product is a synthetic drug, the enforcing officer may consider any of the
evidentiary factors set forth in §
9.98.040(B).
(Ord. MC-1415, passed 7-20-2015)
§ 9.98.070 SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
   Because the use of synthetic drugs has been documented to cause
hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal
ideation, cannibalism and death, any violation of the chapter presents a grave
and imminent danger not only to the person consuming the synthetic drug, but
also to the public at large. If the enforcement officer, based on the facts
then known, determines that a violation of this chapter presents an imminent
danger or hazard or is imminently injurious to the public health or safety,
then that violation is punishable by the summary abatement.
(Ord. MC-1415, passed 7-20-2015)
§ 9.98.080 REVOCATION OF BUSINESS LICENSE.
   No person holding a validly issued city business license and owning or
operating a business in the city may use that business to provide, distribute
or sell any synthetic drug or any substance claimed or represented to be a
synthetic drug. A violation of this section by the holder of a validly issued
city business license shall constitute grounds for the modification, suspension
and/or revocation of said license.
(Ord. MC-1415, passed 7-20-2015)
§ 9.98.090 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Misdemeanor violation. Failure to comply with any of the requirements
of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not exceeding six months or by fine not exceeding $1,000, or by
both; provided that where the City Attorney determines that such action would
be in the interest of justice, he or she may specify in the accusatory pleading
that the offense shall be an infraction.
   (B)   Infraction violation. Where the City Attorney determines that, in the
interest of justice, a violation of this chapter is an infraction, such
infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding $100 for a fist violation, a
fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of the same provision within one
year and a fine not exceeding $500 for each additional infraction violation of
the same provision withing one year. An infraction is not punishable by
imprisonment. A person charged with an infraction shall not be entitled to a
trial by jury and shall not be entitled to have the public defender or other
counsel appointed at public expense to represent him or her, unless he or she
is arrested and not released on his or her written promise to appear, his or
her own recognizance or a deposit of bail. However, any person who has
previously been convicted two or more times during any 12-month period for any
violation of this chapter for a crime made punishable as an infraction shall be
charged with a misdemeanor upon the third violation.
   (C)   Separate offense. Each person committing, causing or maintaining a
violation of this chapter or failing to comply with the requirements set forth
herein shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is
committed, continued, maintained or permitted by such person and shall be
punishable accordingly.
   (D)   Civil remedies available; remedies cumulative. In addition to the
penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a public
nuisance and may be abated by the city by civil process by means of a
restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any manner
provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. All remedies herein are
cumulative and non-exclusive.
   (E)   Administrative citation/administrative civil penalty. In lieu of
issuing a criminal citation, the city may issue an administrative citation
pursuant to
Chapter 9.92 or an administrative civil penalty pursuant to
Chapter 9.93 to any person responsible for committing, causing or maintaining a
violation of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall preclude the city from
also issuing a citation upon the occurrence of the same offense on a separate
day.
   (F)   Additional penalties; costs of abatement. Nothing in this chapter
shall preclude the city from pursuing the remedies made applicable hereto
elsewhere in this municipal code or under state law, including, but not limited
to, as applicable, denial or revocation of certificates of occupancy and
injunctive relief. In any administrative or criminal proceeding involving the
abatement of a public nuisance, the city shall also be entitled to recover its
full reasonable costs of abatement, including, but not limited to,
investigation, analysis and prosecuting the enforcement against the guilty
party, upon submission of proof of such cost by the city.
   (G)   Public nuisance remedies. The prevailing party in any proceeding
associated with the abatement of a public nuisance as provided herein shall be
entitled to recovery of attorneys’ fees incurred in any such proceeding, where
the city has elected, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding
to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees. In no action, administrative
proceeding or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a
prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by
the city in the action or proceeding.
(Ord. MC-1415, passed 7-20-2015)
§ 9.98.100 SEIZURE OF EVIDENCE.
   Any product(s) or substances(s) possessed, provided, distributed or sold in
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be seized by the enforcing
officers and removed and stored in accordance with law.
(Ord. MC-1415, passed 7-20-2015)
§ 9.98.110 EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully
prescribed or to intoxicating chemical compounds which have been approved by
the Federal Food and Drug Administration or which are specifically permitted by
state law, including, without limitation, intoxicating chemical compounds that
are specifically excepted by the State Uniform Controlled Substances Act (Cal.
Health and Safety Code, §§ 11000 et seq.).
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances which are
prohibited by state or federal law, including, without limitation, Cal. Health
and Safety Code, §§ 11357.5, 11375.5, 11401 and the Federal Controlled
Substances Act.
   (C)   This chapter shall not be deemed to prescribe any act which is
positively permitted, prohibited or preempted by any state or federal law or
regulation.
(Ord. MC-1415, passed 7-20-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Federal Controlled Substances Act, see 21 U.S.C. §§ 801 et seq.
§ 9.98.120 SEVERABILITY.
   If any division, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any
reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction or preempted by state or federal legislation, such
decision or legislation shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
of this chapter. The City Council declares that it would have passed this
chapter and each and every division, sentence, clause or phrase not declared
invalid or unconstitutional without regard to any such decision or preemptive
legislation.
(Ord. MC-1415, passed 7-20-2015)
TITLE 10: VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
   Chapter
ARTICLE I. GENERAL REGULATIONS
      
10.04.   DEFINITIONS
      
10.08.   OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
10.12.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
      
10.16.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
      
10.20.   SPECIAL STOPS
      
10.24.   OPERATION OF VEHICLES AND BICYCLES
      
10.25.   VEHICLES FOR SALE ON PUBLIC STREETS
      
10.28.   PEDESTRIANS
      
10.32.   BUSES AND RAILROAD TRAINS
      
10.36.   LOADING ZONES, BUS STOPS AND CROSSWALKS
      
10.38.   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS
      
10.40.   DAMAGE TO PROPERTY
      
10.44.   VIOLATION - PENALTY
ARTICLE II. SPECIFIC REGULATIONS
      
10.48.   BICYCLES
      
10.52.   SPEED LIMITS
      
10.56.   NOISE LIMITS
ARTICLE I. GENERAL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 10.04: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
10.04.010   Defined words from Vehicle Code
   
10.04.020   Generally
   
10.04.025   Abandoned vehicle
   
10.04.030   Alley
   
10.04.040   Commercial vehicle
   
10.04.050   Reserved
   
10.04.060   Holiday and holidays
   
10.04.070   Loading zone
   
10.04.080   Official traffic-control devices
   
10.04.090   Official traffic signals
   
10.04.095   Off-street parking facility
   
10.04.100   Owned by the city
   
10.04.110   Park
   
10.04.120   Parkway
   
10.04.130   Passenger loading zone
   
10.04.140   Pedestrian
   
10.04.150   Police officer and Chief of Police
   
10.04.160   Shall and may
   
10.04.170   Stop
   
10.04.180   Stop or stand
Statutory reference:
   For provisions defining terms used in the California Vehicle Code, see Cal.
Vehicle Code, §§ 100 et seq.
§ 10.04.010 DEFINED WORDS FROM VEHICLE CODE.
   The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the
purpose of this article, have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by the
California Vehicle Code as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this article, or as hereafter amended, which meaning is adopted by reference,
and made a part of this article: authorized emergency vehicle, authorized
emergency vehicle (privately owned), business district, bicycle, crosswalk,
driver, intersection, motorcycle, motortruck, motor vehicle, operator, person,
private road or driveway, residence district, roadway, safety zone, sidewalk,
street or highway, through highway and vehicle.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 3233, passed 1-18-1972)
§ 10.04.020 GENERALLY.
   Whenever, in this article, the words and phrases set forth in this chapter
are used, they shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this chapter.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.04.025 ABANDONED VEHICLE.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle left standing or parked for 72 or more
consecutive hours upon a street, alley, off-street parking facility, public
property or private property without the consent of the owner.
(Ord. MC-668, passed 7-19-1989)
§ 10.04.030 ALLEY.
   ALLEY. Any street less than 25 feet in width between property lines.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.04.040 COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. A vehicle, of a type required to be registered under the
California Vehicle Code, designated, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of persons or property for hire.
(Ord. MC-668, passed 7-19-1989)
§ 10.04.050 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-210, passed 9-20-1982)
§ 10.04.060 HOLIDAY AND HOLIDAYS.
   HOLIDAY and HOLIDAYS. As used in this article, or any resolution adopted
pursuant thereto, means and includes state holidays, including such holidays
when celebrated on the Monday following the Sunday upon which any of such
holidays may fall.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 2690, passed 10-5-1965)
§ 10.04.070 LOADING ZONE.
   LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
commercial vehicles for the loading or unloading of passengers or freight.
(Ord. MC-668, passed 7-19-1989)
§ 10.04.080 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices
not inconsistent with this article, placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.04.090 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed, and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.04.095 OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITY.
   OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITY. Any off-street facility held open for use by
the public for parking vehicles and includes any publicly owned facilities for
off-street parking and privately owned facilities for off-street parking where
no fee is charged for the privilege to park and which are held open for the
common public use of retail customers.
(Ord. MC-668, passed 7-19-1989)
§ 10.04.100 OWNED BY THE CITY.
   OWNED BY THE CITY. As used in this article, or any resolution adopted
pursuant thereto, means owned, leased, operated or controlled by the city.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 3233, passed 1-18-1972)
§ 10.04.110 PARK.
   PARK. The stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in,
loading or unloading passengers or materials.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.04.120 PARKWAY.
   PARKWAY. The portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.04.130 PASSENGER LOADING ZONE.
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.04.140 PEDESTRIAN.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.04.150 POLICE OFFICER AND CHIEF OF POLICE.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. On and after the effective date of this section, the duties
of the Chief of Police under this article, as set forth in §§
10.12.010(A)(3), 10.12.020, 10.12.040, 10.16.010, 10.16.020, 10.16.030,
10.16.070, 10.16.090, 10.20.010, 10.36.010, 10.36.020 and 10.44.010, shall
become the duties of the City Engineer and wherever the title “Chief of Police”
appears in said sections, the designation thereof shall be “City Engineer” for
all purposes and shall be cited and referred to accordingly.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the Police Department of this city.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 2392, passed 9-26-1961)
§ 10.04.160 SHALL AND MAY.
   SHALL is mandatory and MAY is permissive.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.04.170 STOP.
   STOP. When required, means complete cessation of movement.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.04.180 STOP OR STAND.
   STOP or STAND. When prohibited, means any stopping of a vehicle except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
direction of a police officer or official traffic-control device.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
CHAPTER 10.08: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
10.08.010   Obedience to police
   
10.08.020   Exemptions to authorized emergency vehicles
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on local authority to regulate traffic by means of traffic
officers, see Cal. Vehicle Code, § 21100
§ 10.08.010 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   Officers of the Police Department, and such individuals as are designated by
the Chief of Police, or his or her representative, are authorized to direct all
traffic by means of visible or audible signal, and it is unlawful for any
person to refuse or fail to comply with any such unlawful order, signal or
direction. It is unlawful for any minor to direct or attempt to direct traffic,
except when so authorized to do so by the Chief of Police or said Chief’s
representative.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.08.020 EXEMPTIONS TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this article regulating the operation, parking and
standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, or
authorized emergency vehicles (privately owned), as defined in §
10.04.010.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
CHAPTER 10.12: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
10.12.010   Traffic signals, safety zones, turning markers and turns
   
10.12.020   One-way streets and alleys
   
10.12.030   Obedience to no-turn signs and turning markers
   
10.12.040   Signaling devices
   
10.12.050   Enforcement
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on local authority to place traffic-control devices, see Cal.
Vehicle Code, §§ 21351 et seq. and 21450 et seq.
§ 10.12.010 TRAFFIC SIGNALS, SAFETY ZONES, TURNING MARKERS AND TURNS.
   (A)   The City Council shall, by resolution, authorize:
      (1)   The installation and maintenance of official traffic signals at
such intersections and other places as it may deem necessary for the regulation
of traffic;
      (2)   The establishment of safety zones at such places as it may deem
necessary for the protection of pedestrians; and
      (3)   The establishment of turning markers, U-turns and right and left
turns at such places as it may deem necessary for the regulation of traffic;
provided, however, the City Engineer or Director of Public Services are
authorized to designate safety zones, no parking zones, turning markers, U-
turns and right and left turns in all cases of emergency or as a temporary
measure for a period of not exceeding 15 days at such place or places as such
officer may deem necessary. The City Engineer shall erect official traffic
signals at such appropriate place or places, and the Director of Public
Services shall erect such official traffic signs at such place or places.
   (B)   The City Engineer shall install and maintain, or cause to be installed
and maintained, such official traffic signals as are authorized by the City
Council; the Director of Public Services shall install and maintain, or cause
to be installed and maintained, such official safety zones, turning markers, U-
turns and right and left turns as are authorized by the City Council.
   (C)   The City Engineer is authorized to cause the placing and maintenance
of warning and control devices for public works projects being done under
contract with the city. Any person or firm performing work in a city street
pursuant to such a contract shall provide warning and control devices as may be
required in accordance with the latest edition of the “Work Area Traffic
Control Handbook” (“WATCH”), as promulgated by the American Public Works
Association, or as may be approved by the City Engineer. Such devices shall be
removed after completion of the work or improvement project when their use is
no longer required.
   (D)   The Director of Public Services is authorized to cause the placing and
maintenance of warning and control devices for street cutting and street
improvement projects not performed under public works contract with the city.
Designation of the types and number and placement of signs shall be the duty of
the City Engineer, or his or her designee, who shall file a copy of any such
designation with the Director of Public Services. Any person or firm performing
work in a city street, other than as a contractor on a public works project for
the city, shall provide warning and control devices as may be required in
accordance with the latest edition of the “Work Area Traffic Control Handbook”
(“WATCH”), as promulgated by the American Public Works Association, or as may
be approved by the Director of Public Services. The Director of Public Services
shall have authority to enforce the placement and maintenance of all such
traffic-control devices as are designated by the City Engineer or as are
otherwise required by the Director of Public Services. Such devices shall be
removed after completion of the work or improvement project when their use is
no longer required.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 3658, passed 7-18-1977; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984)
§ 10.12.020 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Whenever the City Council, by resolution, designates any one-way street or
alley, the Director of Public Services shall install and maintain signs giving
notice thereof and indicating the course to be traveled. When such signs are so
erected, no person shall drive any vehicle in a direction contrary thereto.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 1706, passed 12-21-1943; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984)
§ 10.12.030 OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-
turn is permitted, no driver of any vehicle, except a bus, shall disobey the
directions of any such sign; and when authorized marks, buttons or other
indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of any vehicle, except a bus,
shall disobey the directions of such indications; provided that such exception
shall be observed as are permitted by law.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 2856, passed 10-3-1967)
§ 10.12.040 SIGNALING DEVICES.
   It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a right turn in
violation of or against a red or stop signal at any intersection in the city
when a sign is erected at such intersection prohibiting any such right turn
against a red or stop signal. The Mayor and City Council shall, by resolution,
designate such intersections, and the Director of Public Services shall cause
signs to be placed and maintained prohibiting any such right turn as herein
provided.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 1949, passed 7-22-1952; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.12.050 ENFORCEMENT.
   No provision of this article for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation,
an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
CHAPTER 10.16: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
   
10.16.010   Parking time limited in certain places
   
10.16.020   Parking prohibited at any time
   
10.16.030   Angle parking
   
10.16.040   Parking parallel on one-way streets
   
10.16.050   Loading and unloading passengers and freight
   
10.16.060   Parking spaces
   
10.16.070   Twenty-minute parking
   
10.16.080   Bus and taxicab stands
   
10.16.090   Stopping prohibited within certain places
   
10.16.100   Unlawful parking for certain purposes
   
10.16.110   Limited parking - alleys and narrow streets
   
10.16.120   Parking of commercial vehicles prohibited on public streets and
rights-of-way; exceptions
   
10.16.130   Application of other laws prohibiting the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles
   
10.16.140   Removal of ignition key
   
10.16.150   Parking enforcement
   
10.16.160   Reserved
   
10.16.170   Parking - Commissioners
   
10.16.180   Exemption to parking restriction - issuing of permit
   
10.16.190   Parking - Commissioners’ permits
   
10.16.200   Limited parking - street sweeping
   
10.16.210   Parking limitations - Central City Mall
   
10.16.220   Reserved
   
10.16.230   Parking abandoned vehicles
   
10.16.240   Parking on unpaved parcels of real property
   
10.16.250   Parking on unpaved parcels of multi-residential, commercial or
industrial property
   
10.16.260   Parking of recreation vehicles on public right-of-way
   
10.16.270   Parking limitations - San Bernardino Baseball Stadium premises
   
10.16.280   Parking on off-street parking areas
   
10.16.290   Private property vehicle impound report and fee
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on local parking curb markings, see Cal. Vehicle Code, §
21458
   For provisions on local parking regulations, see Cal. Vehicle Code, §§ 22500
et seq. and 22652
   For provisions on local traffic regulation, see Cal. Vehicle Code, §§ 21100
et seq.
§ 10.16.010 PARKING TIME LIMITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor and City Council, by resolution, determine that any
street, alley or portion thereof, or other property owned, leased, operated or
controlled by the city, shall be restricted or limited as to time or purpose of
parking thereon, the Director of Public Services shall cause signs or markings
giving adequate notice thereof to be placed and maintained on such street,
alley or other property indicating such limitations or purposes as may be
provided in such resolution.
   (B)   After the sign or marking has been placed pursuant to this section, it
is unlawful for any driver of any vehicle to park such vehicle on such street,
alley or portion thereof, or other property for a time longer or for a purpose
other than is indicated on the sign or marking, or contrary to the restriction
indicated on the sign or marking.
   (C)   The driving or moving of a vehicle from one parking space to a
different parking space in the same time-restricted street, alley or portion
thereof, or other property, shall not be deemed a defense to the time
limitations imposed by this section.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 3328, passed 1-17-1973; Ord. 3837, passed 6-
19-1979; Ord. 3845, passed 7-11-1979; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 10.16.020 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ANY TIME.
   (A)   Whenever the City Council determines, by resolution, that the
stopping, standing or parking of any vehicle upon any street, alley or portion
thereof, or upon other property owned, leased, operated or controlled by the
city, will create a traffic hazard or tend to create traffic congestion, the
Director of Public Services shall indicate, or cause to be indicated, such
place or places by appropriate signs, or he or she shall place, or cause to be
placed, and maintained red paint upon the entire curb surface of such street,
alley or portion thereof, or of such property, and it thereafter is unlawful
for the driver of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle on any such
street, alley or portion thereof, or other city property in violation of such
signs or red paint.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle upon
any street, alley or portion thereof, or other property owned, leased, operated
or controlled by the city:
      (1)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (2)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk except that a bus may stop at a
designated bus stop;
      (3)   Within 30 feet of the approach to any traffic signal, stop sign or
flashing beacon;
      (4)   At any place where the City Engineer determines that it is
necessary in order to eliminate dangerous traffic hazards, such location not to
exceed 50 feet in length;
      (5)   In front of a public or private driveway, except that a bus engaged
as a common carrier, school bus or a taxicab may stop to load or unload
passengers when authorized by the city pursuant to ordinance; or
      (6)   On a sidewalk, except electric cars when authorized by city
ordinance, as specified in Cal. Vehicle Code, § 21114.5.
   (C)   Whenever the City Council determines, by resolution, that the parking
of any commercial vehicle or house car upon any street, alley or part thereof,
or upon other property owned, leased, operated or controlled by the city, will
create a traffic hazard, the Director of Public Services shall indicate, or
cause to be indicated, such place or places by appropriate prohibitory signs,
and it is thereafter unlawful for the driver of any commercial vehicle or house
car to park such commercial vehicle or house car on any such street or alley,
or portion thereof, or on other property in violation of such signs.
   (D)   Pursuant to the Cal. Vehicle Code, § 22651 or other state law, any
vehicle parked or left standing where the Mayor and City Council, by resolution
or ordinance, have prohibited such parking may be removed. No vehicle may be
removed unless signs are posted giving notice of the removal.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 3315, passed 12-7-1972; Ord. 3328, passed 1-
17-1973; Ord. 3736, passed 7-5-1978; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-
460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-641, passed 11-9-1988)
§ 10.16.030 ANGLE PARKING.
   The City Council is authorized to determine, by resolution, those streets or
parts of streets upon which angle parking shall be permitted (other than upon
those state highways where such parking is prohibited by the California Vehicle
Code) and the Director of Public Services shall place and maintain white lines
upon the surface of the roadway indicating the angle at which parking is
permitted.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 10.16.040 PARKING PARALLEL ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be
stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb facing in the
direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street.
   (B)   In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless
signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 2768, passed 8-23-1966)
§ 10.16.050 LOADING AND UNLOADING PASSENGERS AND FREIGHT.
   It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop such vehicle for a
period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers or freight; provided that in no event shall such vehicle be stopped
for a period in excess of three minutes for the loading or unloading of
passengers, nor in excess of 40 minutes for the loading or unloading of
freight, in any of the following places:
   (A)   At any curb where the grade of the street exceeds 12%;
   (B)   In any alley; and
   (C)   In any loading zone, as authorized by the City Traffic Engineer; and
provided, further, that such vehicle is authorized to be stopped for a period
not to exceed ten minutes for the loading or unloading of passengers
immediately adjacent to hotel entrances.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 3328, passed 1-17-1973)
§ 10.16.060 PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   The Director of Public Services is authorized to install and maintain
parking space markings to indicate parking spaces where authorized parking is
permitted.
   (B)   When such parking space markings are placed, subject to other and more
restrictive limitation, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked
other than within a single space, unless the size or shape of such vehicle
makes compliance impossible.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 3328, passed 1-17-1973; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984)
§ 10.16.070 TWENTY-MINUTE PARKING.
   When the Director of Public Services places and maintains, or causes to be
placed and maintained, authorized signs or green paint on curbs, no vehicle may
be parked for a longer period of time than 20 minutes as indicated on such
signs or by the green paint on the curbs.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 3328, passed 1-17-1973; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984)
§ 10.16.080 BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park upon any street
in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop, or taxicab
stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of
any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking regulations at any place for the purposes of, and while actually
engaged in, loading or unloading passengers.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle other
than a bus in a bus stop when any such stop has been officially designated and
appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may
temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any
bus waiting to enter or about to enter such zones.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.16.090 STOPPING PROHIBITED WITHIN CERTAIN PLACES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to stop such
vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflicts with other traffic, or in
compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic sign or signal in
any of the following designated places.
   (B)   At any point where the adjacent curb has been painted or marked red by
the Director of Public Services, or at any place where, by other appropriate
signs placed and maintained by the Chief of Police, notice is given that the
stopping of vehicles is prohibited.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 10.16.100 UNLAWFUL PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.
   It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stand or park such vehicle
upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
   (A)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency; and
   (B)   Within the business district from which vehicle merchandise is being
sold.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. MC-401, passed 8-21-1984; Ord. MC-460,
passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.16.110 LIMITED PARKING - ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park such vehicle upon
any public street or alley within the city, the roadway of which is not more
than 25 feet and not less than 20 feet in width for a period of not to exceed
30 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day except
Sundays and holidays.
   (B)   It is unlawful for the driver, owner or operator of any truck to park
such vehicle upon any public street or alley within the city, the roadway of
which is not more than 62 feet, six inches, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m., except for the period of time necessary for the loading or unloading
of passengers or freight; provided that in no event shall such truck be stopped
for a period in excess of 20 minutes for the loading or unloading of freight.
   (C)   The Chief of Police may, with the consent of the Mayor and City
Council, permit the parking of trucks upon such streets or alleys for a period
of time as specifically set forth in the permit and upon such conditions as
therein specified.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person who owns or has possession, custody or
control of any vehicle to park or leave standing such vehicle upon any street
or alley for 72 or more consecutive hours.
   (E)   Police officers and the Superintendent of Public Buildings, or his or
her authorized representatives, are authorized to remove from streets or
highways or from public property, within the city, to the nearest garage or
other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the Police
Department, any vehicle which has been parked or left standing on such street
or highway for 72 or more consecutive hours, or which is parked on public
property or on a street or highway in violation of law or resolution; provided,
in the latter instance, that signs are posted giving notice of the removal.
   (F)   Whenever a city official removes a vehicle from a street or highway or
public property as authorized in this section and the city official knows or is
able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle or from the
registration records of the State Department of Motor Vehicles the name and
address of the registered or legal owners thereof, such city official shall
immediately give, or cause to be given, notice in writing to such owner of the
fact of such removal, the grounds thereof and of the place to which such
vehicle has been moved. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public
garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage.
   (G)   Whenever a city official removing a vehicle from a street or a highway
or public property under this section does not know and is not able to
ascertain the name of the owner or, for any other reason, is unable to give the
notice to the owner as hereinbefore provided and in the event the vehicle is
not returned to the owner within a period of 72 hours, then, and in that event,
the city official shall immediately send, or cause to be sent, written report
of such removal by mail to the Department of Motor Vehicles at Sacramento and
shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public garage in
which the vehicle may be stored. Such report shall be made on a form furnished
by such Department and shall include a complete description of the vehicle; the
date, time and place from which removed; the grounds for such removal; and the
name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 1755, passed 3-27-1946; Ord. 2537, passed
11-19-1963; Ord. 3880, passed 11-20-1979; Ord. MC-645, passed 12-7-1988)
§ 10.16.120 PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC STREETS AND
RIGHTS-OF-WAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall park or stand any commercial vehicle, truck tractor,
semitrailer or trailer having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or more on any street, alley or parkway in any residential
district, or on any residentially zoned property in the city.
   (B)   No person shall park or stand any commercial vehicle, truck tractor,
semitrailer or trailer having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or more for a continuous period of time in excess of two hours on
any street, alley or parkway in any non-residential district of the city. Each
consecutive two-hour period shall be considered a separate violation for the
purpose of this division (B).
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any vehicle or trailer component thereof making pick ups or
deliveries of goods, wares or merchandise from or to any building or structure
located on the restricted streets and highways, or for the purpose of
delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration,
remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted
streets or highways for which a building permit has previously been obtained;
      (2)   Any vehicle parked in connection with and in the aid of the
performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which said vehicle
is parked;
      (3)   Any passenger bus under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission;
      (4)   Any vehicle owned by a public utility or licensed contractor if
necessary for use in connection with the installation or repair of any public
utility;
      (5)   Any vehicle owned by the city, county, state or licensed contractor
engaged in the installation, maintenance or repair of any public property,
utility or highway; and
      (6)   Any authorized emergency vehicle as defined by the California
Vehicle Code.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the term RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT shall
mean any single-family or multiple-family zoning district in the city. The Cal.
Vehicle Code, § 22507.5(c) allows the local authority to define, by ordinance,
the term residential district in accordance with its zoning ordinance.
   (E)   Any commercial vehicle, truck tractor, semitrailer or trailer having a
manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more left parked
or standing on any street, alley or parkway in excess of 24 hours may be towed
away, pursuant to the Cal. Vehicle Code, § 22651(n).
   (F)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of an infraction.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 2075, passed 9-21-1955; Ord. 3519, passed 8-
19-1975; Ord. 3817, passed 5-9-1979; Ord. 3960, passed 8-20-1980; Ord. MC-1107,
passed 11-6-2001; Ord. MC-1303, passed 4-21-2009)
§ 10.16.130 APPLICATION OF OTHER LAWS PROHIBITING THE STOPPING, STANDING OR
PARKING OF VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this article, and of resolutions adopted pursuant thereto,
imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from
the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the California
Vehicle Code, or of the ordinances of this city, prohibiting or limiting the
stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified
times.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 2403, passed 12-11-1961)
§ 10.16.140 REMOVAL OF IGNITION KEY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person having charge or control of a motor
vehicle to allow such vehicle to stand upon any street, alley or parking lot
upon which there is no attendant, when such motor vehicle is unattended,
without first locking the ignition of the vehicle and removing the ignition key
from such vehicle.
   (B)   Any person convicted under this section shall be punished by a fine of
not less nor more than $2; and such person shall not be granted probation by
the court, nor shall the court suspend the execution of the sentence imposed
upon such person.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 2613, passed 9-29-1964; Ord. 3880, passed
11-20-1979; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.16.150 PARKING ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Parking control checkers are authorized and empowered to enforce
parking regulations adopted pursuant to this article and to issue parking
control notices throughout the city as provided in the Cal. Vehicle Code, §
40202.
   (B)   The Director of Facilities Management, or his or her authorized
representatives, is authorized and empowered to enforce parking regulations
adopted pursuant to §
10.16.160 relating to parking spaces reserved for handicapped persons and to
issue parking control notices relating thereto as provided in the Cal. Vehicle
Code, § 40202.
   (C)   The Director of Facilities Management, or his or her authorized
representative, is authorized and empowered to enforce parking regulations
adopted pursuant to §
10.16.170 relating to parking spaces reserved for city board or commission
members and to issue parking control notices relating thereto as provided in
Cal. Vehicle Code, § 40202.
   (D)   Any police officers, the Director of Facilities Management, parking
control checkers or any regularly employed and salaried city employee enforcing
parking laws and regulations are authorized and empowered to immobilize
vehicles as provided in the Cal. Vehicle Code, § 22651.7.
   (E)   The Director of Facilities Management, or his or her authorized
representative, is authorized and empowered to enforce parking regulations
adopted pursuant to this chapter and to issue parking control notices
throughout the city as provided in §§
15.24.040(A)(5),
15.24.040(A)(6),
15.24.050(A)(5) and
15.24.050(A)(6).
   (F)   The Code Compliance Manager, or his or her authorized representatives,
is authorized pursuant to the Cal. Vehicle Code, § 22651 or other state law to
remove any abandoned motor vehicle, trailer or dolly parked, left standing or
abandoned upon any street, alley, off-street public parking facility or other
property owned, leased, operated and/or controlled by the city for 72 or more
consecutive hours.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 2754, passed 6-3-1966; Ord. 3497, passed 5-
16-1975; Ord. 3555, passed 2-18-1976; Ord. 3733, passed 6-28-1978; Ord. 3844,
passed 7-11-1979; Ord. 3855, passed 8-21-1979; Ord. MC-541, passed 8-21-1986;
Ord. MC-547, passed 10-22-1986; Ord. MC-641, passed 11-9-1988; Ord. MC-762,
passed 11-27-1990; Ord. MC-993, passed 4-22-1997)
§ 10.16.160 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-973, passed 7-5-1996)
§ 10.16.170 PARKING - COMMISSIONERS.
   When the City Traffic Engineer places and maintains, or causes to be placed
and maintained, authorized signs or markings on, in or about public parking
spaces designating the spaces to be available and reserved for vehicular
parking by city board or commissioner members only, no vehicle other than those
with a permit pursuant to §
10.16.190 shall be parked in any such parking space so marked, signed or
designated.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 3743, passed 8-25-1978; Ord. 3855, passed 8-
21-1979; Ord. 3880, passed 11-20-1979; Ord. MC-42, passed 4-8-1981)
§ 10.16.180 EXEMPTION TO PARKING RESTRICTION - ISSUING OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter limiting or
restricting the parking or standing of vehicles on certain streets or highways,
or portions thereof, during all or certain hours of the day, vehicles
displaying the appropriate preferential parking permit as hereafter provided
may park on streets designated by resolution and shall not be subject to
applicable parking limitations or restrictions; provided, however, such
exemption shall not be permitted at loading zones or when parking is completely
prohibited under all circumstances.
   (B)   The Director of Facilities Management/ Parking Control shall issue a
preferential permit not to exceed four permits per dwelling, to persons whose
residence is adjacent to designated streets in a time limit parking zone when
permitted by resolution and upon application therefor. A fee shall not be
required for issuance or re-issuance of any preferential parking permit. The
permits shall be valid for only the same block upon which the residence or
business is located or, in cases of corner locations, the permits shall be
valid on the two contiguous blocks. The permits shall be valid for the period
specified thereon. The permit shall be displayed on the vehicle as directed by
the Director of Facilities Management/Parking Control.
   (C)   The Director of Facilities Management shall issue a preferential
parking permit to validated employees who have signed a car pooling contract
with the city. Permits are to be validated every six months, during June and
December of each year. The permits shall only be valid for the fourth level of
the City Hall five-level parking structure and designated spaces at the City
Yards, the Central Police Station and the Norman Feldheym Central Library. The
permit shall be displayed on the vehicle as directed by the Facilities Manager.
   (D)   For all permits issued under this section, the Director of Facilities
Management shall keep a record of each permittee’s name; address; vehicle
license plate number; state driver’s license number; date of issuance;
expiration date, if any; and any other information required for the proper
administration of the issuance of permits.
(Ord. MC-738, passed 8-6-1990; Ord. MC-843, passed 7-22-1992; Ord. MC-855,
passed 12-23-1992; Ord. MC-875, passed 6-9-1993; Ord. MC-1131, passed 11-6-
2002)
§ 10.16.190 PARKING - COMMISSIONERS’ PERMITS.
   (A)   The Superintendent of Public Buildings/ Parking Control shall issue a
permit to all City Board and Commissioner members. The permit shall be
effective for a one-year period and shall be annually renewed prior to the
expiration of the one-year period. The permit shall expire and shall be of no
further force and effect when the person to whom it is issued ceases to be a
member of the city board or commission. A decal or sticker, with the expiration
date printed thereon, shall be affixed to the rear left bumper of the vehicle.
The City Clerk shall provide the Superintendent of Public Buildings/Parking
Control with a current list of all Board and Commissioner members, and shall
keep such list current by providing names of new board and commission members
as appointed or name of any board and commissioner members removed.
   (B)   For all permits issued under this section, the Superintendent of
Public Buildings/Parking Control shall keep a record of the name, address,
vehicle license plate number, state driver’s license number, type of permit,
date of issuance, expiration date and any other information required for the
proper administration of the issuance of permits.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 3855, passed 8-21-1979; Ord. 3880, passed
11-20-1979)
§ 10.16.200 LIMITED PARKING - STREET SWEEPING.
   The Director of Public Services is authorized to prohibit parking on
designated city streets and private streets open for public use, for limited
periods of time on designated days, for street sweeping purposes, when debris
or refuse on a given street has accumulated. The Director of Public Services is
authorized to install, at any such street or streets, signs giving notice that
no person shall stand, stop or park a vehicle, except as provided on such
signs. Whenever authorized signs are in place giving notice that stopping,
standing or parking is prohibited during such hours on such days as are
indicated on such signs, it is unlawful for any person to stop or park any
vehicle at any time during such hours on such days.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 3880, passed 11-20-1979; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984)
§ 10.16.210 PARKING LIMITATIONS - CENTRAL CITY MALL.
   (A)   The Superintendent of Public Buildings/ Parking Control is authorized
to prohibit vehicular parking in any parking area of the Central City Mall,
except for the parking of motor vehicles during the period of time such person
or the occupants of such vehicle are customers or invitees of the retail and
business establishments in the Central City Mall. The Superintendent of Public
Buildings/Parking Control shall install and maintain at each entry to the
parking area of the Central City Mall, authorized signs giving notice that no
person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in any parking area of the
Central City Mall, except as provided on such signs. Whenever authorized signs
are in place giving notice, it is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or
park any motor vehicle in such parking area of the Central City Mall, except
during the period of time of such person or occupants of such vehicle are
customers or invitees of the retail and business establishments of the Central
City Mall. Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of any
infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as set forth in §
10.44.010.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable in parking
areas of the Central City Mall specifically reserved for employee parking or
for use of business invitees of the buildings known as the Andreson and
Woolworth Buildings.
(Ord. MC-415, passed 10-16-1984)
§ 10.16.220 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-973, passed 7-5-1996)
§ 10.16.230 PARKING ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   It is unlawful to park, leave standing or abandon any motor vehicle,
trailer or dolly upon any street, alley, off-street public parking facility or
other property owned, leased, operated and/or controlled by the city for 72 or
more consecutive hours.
   (B)   It is unlawful to park, leave standing or abandon a vehicle upon
private property without the express or implied consent of the owner or person
in lawful possession or control of the property for 72 or more consecutive
hours.
   (C)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $100 and shall provide proof that the costs of
removal and disposition of the vehicle have been paid. No part of any imposed
fine shall be suspended pursuant to the Cal. Vehicle Code, § 22523.
(Ord. MC-668, passed 7-19-1989)
§ 10.16.240 PARKING ON UNPAVED PARCELS OF REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   A person shall not stop, stand or park a vehicle on any unpaved parcel
of real property; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed to prevent the parking of a vehicle in a residential zone on an
unpaved driveway or a drive approach to a garage or other durable or permanent
driveway or pad installed for the purpose of parking such vehicle on a parcel
of real property which is not subject to § 19.24.060(18) of the Development
Code at the time of violation.
   (B)   Those persons authorized to issue citations pursuant to §
9.90.010 and any police officer, any parking control checker and the Director
of Facilities Management, or his or her authorized representative, is
authorized and empowered to enforce this parking regulation and to issue
parking control notices related thereto as provided in Cal. Vehicle Code, §
40202.
(Ord. MC-1064, passed 1-11-2000)
§ 10.16.250 PARKING ON UNPAVED PARCELS OF MULTI-RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL OR
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   A person shall not stop, stand or park a vehicle on any unpaved parcel
of multi-residential, commercial or industrial property; provided, however,
that this chapter shall not apply in instances where a temporary use permit has
been granted under Development Code, § 19.70.020(9).
   (B)   The Director of Facilities Management, or his or her authorized
representative, is authorized and empowered to enforce this parking regulation
and to issue parking control notices related thereto as provided in Cal.
Vehicle Code, § 40202.
(Ord. MC-1072, passed 5-3-2000)
§ 10.16.260 PARKING OF RECREATION VEHICLES ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Recreation vehicles may be temporarily parked on public rights-of-way
in front of residences for not more than 48 continuous hours for the purposes
of loading or unloading. Forty-eight hours must elapse before the start of a
new 48-hour period, together with movement of the vehicle a distance of at
least 500 feet.
   (B)   The Director of Facilities Management, or his or her authorized
representative, is authorized and empowered to enforce this parking regulation
and to issue parking control notices related thereto as provided in the Cal.
Vehicle Code, § 40202.
§ 10.16.270 PARKING LIMITATIONS - SAN BERNARDINO BASEBALL STADIUM PREMISES.
   Vehicular parking is prohibited in any parking area of the San Bernardino
Baseball Stadium except for the parking of motor vehicles during the period of
time that the occupants of such vehicle are licensees or invitees of events
occurring at the San Bernardino Baseball Stadium premises. The Director of
Facilities Management shall install and maintain at each entrance to the
parking area of the San Bernardino Baseball Stadium authorized signs giving
notice that no person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in any parking
area of the San Bernardino Baseball Stadium, except as provided on such signs.
Subsequent to the initial posting of authorized signs giving notice, it is
unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in such
parking area of the San Bernardino Baseball Stadium except during the period of
time the occupants of such vehicle are licensees or invitees of the events
occurring at the San Bernardino Baseball Stadium premises. Any person violating
this section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined as set forth in §
10.44.010.
(Ord. MC-1068, passed 4-18-2000; Ord. MC-1176, passed 7-22-2004)
§ 10.16.280 PARKING ON OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   A person shall not park or display a vehicle in a public or private
off-street parking area, including paved vacant lots, for the purpose of the
sale, lease, display, repair or storage of said vehicle, unless said lot has
received all necessary approvals, permits and business registration for said
sale, lease, display, repair or storage of vehicles.
   (B)   For this section, the term VEHICLE includes, but is not limited to:
cars, vans, trucks, trailers, boats, campers and recreation vehicles.
   (C)   Those persons authorized to issue citations pursuant to §
9.90.010, any police officer, any parking control checker and the Director of
Facilities Management, or his or her authorized representative, is authorized
and empowered to enforce this parking regulation and to issue parking control
notices related thereto as provided in Cal. Vehicle Code, § 40202.
(Ord. MC-1116, passed 2-20-2002)
§ 10.16.290 PRIVATE PROPERTY VEHICLE IMPOUND REPORT AND FEE.
   (A)   Any tow company that tows and impounds a vehicle from private property
in the city under the California Vehicle Code shall complete and submit a
private party tow report form to the Police Department either by fax or e-mail
by the end of the business day following the tow.
   (B)   The owner of, or other person responsible for, any vehicle impounded
by a tow company from private property in the city under the California Vehicle
Code shall pay, in accordance with the provisions of this section, a fee in an
amount set by resolution by the Mayor and City Council to reimburse the city
for the costs of processing and recordation of notices and reports of the tow
and impound of such person’s vehicle. Such fee shall be collected by the tow
company impounding the vehicle at the time of collection of its own towing and/
or impound fees and shall be paid over to the city each month within ten days
after the close of the calendar month for which payment is due. Each towing
company shall provide to the city, on a monthly basis concurrently with its
monthly payment, a summary report of all such impounds and fees collected in
such form and/or detail as the Chief of Police may specify, from time to time,
and shall make available to the city upon request any and all records of the
information necessary to verify such report upon the request of the city.
CHAPTER 10.20: SPECIAL STOPS
Section
   
10.20.010   Stop sign erection
   
10.20.020   Stop at through street or stop intersection
   
10.20.030   Emerging from alley or private driveway
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on local authority to regulate stops at through streets and
stop intersections, see Cal. Vehicle Code, § 21101
§ 10.20.010 STOP SIGN ERECTION.
   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes
any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which
vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, the Director of
Public Services shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows.
   (A)   A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting
such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of
other intersections where a stop is required.
   (B)   Every such sign shall be placed at or near the entrance to the highway
or intersection where a stop is required and every such sign shall conform to
the requirements of the California Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 10.20.020 STOP AT THROUGH STREET OR STOP INTERSECTION.
   When stop signs are erected, as provided in this article, at the entrance to
any intersection, every driver of a vehicle and every motorist of a street car
shall stop at every such sign, before entering the intersection, except when
directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.20.030 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the
sidewalk area extending across any alley way.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
CHAPTER 10.24: OPERATION OF VEHICLES AND BICYCLES
Section
   
10.24.010   Interference with operation of fire apparatus
   
10.24.020   Distance to be kept from fire apparatus
   
10.24.030   Operation of vehicle prohibited when fire apparatus in operation
   
10.24.040   Certain vehicles prohibited in the business district
   
10.24.050   Crossing fire hose
   
10.24.060   Unlawful to drive through procession
   
10.24.070   Reserved
   
10.24.080   Reserved
   
10.24.090   Skateboards, skates and the like restricted
   
10.24.195   Citywide truck routes
   
10.24.100   Use of coasters and similar devices restricted
   
10.24.110   Reserved
   
10.24.120   Reckless driving of animals
   
10.24.130   Driving over new street or sidewalk
   
10.24.140   Permits for parades and processions
   
10.24.150   Limitations on backing
   
10.24.160   Clinging to moving vehicle
   
10.24.170   Enforcement of regulations
   
10.24.180   Speed limit on public grounds
   
10.24.190   Commercial vehicles prohibited on certain streets
   
10.24.200   Municipal parking lots and structures
   
10.24.210   Reserved
   
10.24.220   Traffic diversion
   
10.24.230   Prohibition from participating in Route 66 cruising events without
registration
Cross-reference:
   For additional provisions on bicycles, see
Chapter 10.48
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on local regulation of bicycles, see Cal. Vehicle Code, §
21206
§ 10.24.010 INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OF FIRE APPARATUS.
   It is unlawful for any person operating any vehicle upon the public streets
of the city to obstruct the streets with such vehicle so as to interfere in any
manner with the operation of any fire apparatus upon such street.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.24.020 DISTANCE TO BE KEPT FROM FIRE APPARATUS.
   It is unlawful for any person operating any vehicle upon the public streets
of the city to operate the same so that it will move in the same direction that
any fire apparatus is traveling until such fire apparatus is at least 600 feet
distant, and it is unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle so as to
approach within 600 feet of any moving fire apparatus.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.24.030 OPERATION OF VEHICLE PROHIBITED WHEN FIRE APPARATUS IN OPERATION.
   When any fire apparatus is engaged in extinguishing a fire, it is unlawful
for any person to operate any vehicle upon the same street, so as to approach
within 300 feet of such fire apparatus.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.24.040 CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN THE BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the operator of any of the following vehicles to
drive the same in the business district between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. of any day except Sunday:
      (1)   Any vehicle so loaded that any part of its load extends more than
three feet to the front or more than ten feet to the rear of the vehicle;
except with written permit of the Chief of Police; and
      (2)   Any vehicle used exclusively for advertising purposes.
   (B)   (1)   The Director of Public Services is authorized to establish over
an appropriate street or streets, and to designate by appropriate signs,
through traffic routes for the movement of vehicles of two or more tons
capacity designed for carrying merchandise, freight or material.
      (2)   When any such through traffic routes are established and designated
by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle mentioned in this section
shall drive on such route or routes, and none other, except when it is
reasonably necessary.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 10.24.050 CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle over any unprotected hose
of the Fire Department when laid down on any street, private driveway or street
car track, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the
Fire Department.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.24.060 UNLAWFUL TO DRIVE THROUGH PROCESSION.
   It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle or street car to drive
between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or other authorized
procession; provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.24.070 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-65, passed 6-19-1981)
§ 10.24.080 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.24.090 SKATEBOARDS, SKATES AND THE LIKE RESTRICTED.
   It is unlawful for any person to ride upon or use in any manner any coaster,
toy vehicle, roller skate, skates, skateboard or other kindred contrivance or
device upon any sidewalk within a business district of the city or upon any
public roadway in the city.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 3554, passed 2-18-1976)
§ 10.24.195 CITYWIDE TRUCK ROUTES.
   The City of San Bernardino general plan truck routes designated in Figure C-
3 in the city's general plan are hereby adopted herein by this reference, and
as amended from time to time.
(Ord. MC-1657, passed 12-17-2025)
§ 10.24.100 USE OF COASTERS AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.
   It is unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of
any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device to go upon any roadway.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.24.110 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-210, passed 9-20-1982)
§ 10.24.120 RECKLESS DRIVING OF ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for any person to carelessly or recklessly ride or drive any
horse or other animal upon any of the public streets or alleys of the city so
as to endanger life or property.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.24.130 DRIVING OVER NEW STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   It is unlawful for any person to ride or drive, or cause to be ridden or
driven, or propelled any vehicle over or across any street which is being
graded or repaired, or upon which concrete sidewalks or paving is being
constructed, or upon which concrete sidewalks or paving has been newly made,
where across or around such street there is a barrier, or at, over or near
which there is a person or sign warning persons not to drive over or across
such street or sidewalk, or a sign stating that the street is closed.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.24.140 PERMITS FOR PARADES AND PROCESSIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person or organization to permit, direct or allow any
procession or parade to occupy, march or proceed along any street except in
accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police, or his or her
representative, and such other regulations as are set forth in this article
which may apply, except funeral processions, the military forces of the United
States, the military forces of this state and the forces of the City Police and
Fire Departments.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.24.150 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.
   It is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to back the same into an
intersection or over a crosswalk, or in any event or at any place to back a
vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.24.160 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLE.
   It is unlawful for any person riding upon a bicycle, motorcycle, coaster,
sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle to attach the same or himself or herself
to any street car or moving vehicle upon any roadway.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.24.170 ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of Police and each police officer are authorized to enforce the
traffic and parking regulations authorized or provided pursuant to this
article.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 2579, passed 5-26-1964; Ord. 2917, passed 6-
25-1968; Ord. 3733, passed 6-28-1978)
§ 10.24.180 SPEED LIMIT ON PUBLIC GROUNDS.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle on any
roadway, road, alley or way, or upon the grounds of a public park, playground
or public school or of a county or municipal institution or building, or of an
educational institution or building, at a speed in excess of 15 mph.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 2579, passed 5-26-1964; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985)
§ 10.24.190 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority and restrictions of Cal. Vehicle Code, §§
35701 et seq., no person shall operate or drive any commercial vehicle upon the
following streets, and the Traffic Engineer shall cause appropriate signage to
be erected giving notice thereof:
      (1)   Palmyra Drive between Sierra Way and Sonora Drive;
      (2)   Arlington Drive between Palmyra Drive and its terminus 300 feet to
the southeast;
      (3)   Lugo Avenue between Palmyra Drive and Ralston Avenue;
      (4)   Thirty-Ninth Street between Lugo Avenue and its terminus 290 feet
to the east;
      (5)   Thirty-Ninth Street between Palmyra Drive and Belle Street;
      (6)   Ralston Avenue between Waterman Avenue and Sonora Drive;
      (7)   Belle Street between Ralston Avenue and Thirty-Ninth Street;
      (8)   Sonora Drive between Palmyra Drive and its terminus 260 feet to the
southeast;
      (9)   Sonora Drive between Palmyra Drive and its terminus 260 feet to the
southeast;
      (10)   Twenty-Fourth Street between Lincoln Drive and “I” Street;
      (11)   Twenty-Fifth Street between Lincoln Drive and “I” Street;
      (12)   Twenty-Sixth Street between Lincoln Drive and “I” Street;
      (13)   “I” Street between Twenty-Third Street and Twenty-Seventh Street;
      (14)   Davidson Street between Tippecanoe Avenue and Richardson Street;
      (15)   Hardt Street between Tippecanoe Avenue and Richardson Street;
      (16)   Gould Street between Tippecanoe Avenue and Richardson Street;
      (17)   Coulston Street between Tippecanoe Avenue and Richardson Street;
      (18)   Tia Juana Street between Fourth Street and Fifth Street;
      (19)   Cabrera Avenue between Fourth Street and Fifth Street;
      (20)   Kingman Street between Tia Juana Street and Mt. Vernon Avenue;
      (21)   Poplar Street between Pepper Avenue and Meridian Avenue;
      (22)   Meridian Avenue between Mill Street and the end of Meridian Avenue
north of Walnut Street; and
      (23)   Mt. Vernon Avenue between 5th Street and 2nd Street (Mt. Vernon
Avenue Bridge), except for commercial pickup trucks, vans and passenger cars.
   (B)   Pursuant to the authority and restrictions of Cal. Vehicle Code, §§
35701 et seq., no person shall operate or drive any vehicle exceeding a maximum
gross weight limit of 10,000 pounds upon the following streets, and the
Director of Public Services shall cause appropriate signs to be erected giving
notice of such weight limitation prohibition:
      (1)   Airport Drive;
      (2)   (a)   Arrowhead Avenue between Marshall Boulevard and Kendall
Drive; and
         (b)   Belleview Street between “K” Street and “I” Street.
      (3)   Businesscenter Drive;
      (4)   Commercenter Circle;
      (5)   Commercenter East;
      (6)   (a)   Commercenter West; and
         (b)   Congress Street between “K” Street and “I” Street.
      (7)   (a)   Diners Court;
         (b)   “I” Street between Congress Street and the end of “I” Street
approximately 300 feet north of Belleview Street (Rialto Avenue); and
         (c)   “J” Street between Rialto Avenue and the end of “J” Street
approximately 1,000 feet south of Congress Street.
      (8)   San Bernardino Civic Plaza Access Loop;
      (9)   Sunwest Lane between Hospitality Lane and “E” Street;
      (10)   Meridian Avenue between Rialto Avenue and 170 feet north of 9th
Street;
      (11)   Belleview Street between “K” Street and “I” Street;
      (12)   Congress Street between “K” and “I” Street;
      (13)   “J” Street between Rialto Avenue and the end of “J” Street,
approximately 1,000 feet south of Congress Street; and
      (14)   “I” Street between Congress Street and the end of “I” Street
approximately 300 feet north of Belleview Street (Rialto Avenue).
   (C)   Pursuant to the authority and restrictions of Cal. Vehicle Code, §§
35701 and 35703 et seq., no person shall operate or drive any commercial
vehicle having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating (“GVWR”) exceeding
30,000 pounds upon the following streets, and the Director of Public Services
shall cause appropriate signs to be erected giving notice of such weight
limitation prohibition:
      (1)   40th Street, east of Harrison Street for a distance of 500 feet;
      (2)   40th Street, west of Waterman Avenue to Acacia;
      (3)   Valencia Avenue between 40th Street and 30th Street;
      (4)   Parkside Drive between 40th Street and 30th Street;
      (5)   Sierra Way, from the Highway 18 junction to 30th Street;
      (6)   Mountain View Avenue, from its merge with Electric Avenue to 30th
Street;
      (7)   Electric Avenue, from 40th Street to its merge with Mountain View
Avenue;
      (8)   Hospitality Lane, from “E” Street to Waterman Avenue; and
      (9)   Hunts Lane, from Hospitality Lane to “E” Street.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 2915, passed 6-25-1968; Ord. 3718, passed 4-
19-1978; Ord. MC-80, passed 7-8-1981; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-
465, passed 7-2-1985; Ord. MC-1046, passed 5-5-1999; Ord. MC-1079, passed 8-23-
2000; Ord. MC-1110, passed 12-4-2001; Ord. MC-1133, passed 11-20-2002; Ord. MC-
1139, passed 3-4-2003; Ord. MC-1283, passed 9-3-2008; Ord. MC-1398, passed 4-
21-2014; Ord. MC-1410, passed 12-1-2014)
§ 10.24.200 MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   A municipal parking facility is a parking lot, parcel of land,
facility, garage or structure owned, leased or operated by the city, or in
which the city has a possessory right of interest, and which is used as a
municipal or public parking facility for the off-street parking of vehicles.
   (B)   It is unlawful in any municipal parking facility for any person to
park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in any
driveway, aisle, walk or area other than entirely within a designated parking
space or in any location or position across any line or marking designating a
parking space.
   (C)   It is unlawful in any municipal parking facility for any person to
drive a vehicle, upon any driveway, aisle, walk or area, in a direction
contrary to the direction of travel indicated by arrows or marking painted or
placed thereon.
   (D)   It is unlawful in any municipal parking facility for any person to
drive a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent having due
regard for the weather, visibility, the traffic on and the surface and width of
the driveway or aisle or in any event to drive the vehicle at a speed which
endangers the safety of persons or property.
   (E)   It is unlawful in any municipal parking facility for any person to
drive a vehicle at a speed greater than ten mph.
   (F)   The provisions of this section shall not relieve any person from the
duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the California Vehicle
Code or local ordinance or of any special condition or regulation imposed by
the Mayor and City Council, City Traffic Engineer or Director of Public
Services.
   (G)   It is unlawful for any person to ride upon any bicycle, roller skate
or skateboard, or other kindred contrivance, in any municipal parking facility,
as defined in division (A) above, except a municipal parking facility located
in a municipal park or playground.
   (H)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a police officer in
the performance of his or her duties.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 3329, passed 2-16-1973; Ord. 3538, passed
10-28-1975; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord.
MC-811, passed 11-6-1991)
§ 10.24.210 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 10.24.220 TRAFFIC DIVERSION.
   (A)   If a peace officer determines, pursuant to Cal. Vehicle Code, §
21101.2 and this section, that the traffic load on a particular street or
highway in the city, or a portion thereof, is such that little or no vehicular
flow is occurring and, additionally, if the peace officer finds that a
significant number of vehicles are not promptly moving when an opportunity
arises to do so, then the peace officer may divert vehicles, excepting public
safety or emergency vehicles from that street or highway, or a portion thereof,
subject to traffic congestion until such time as reasonably flowing traffic is
restored.
   (B)   Such diversion of vehicles by a uniformed peace officer shall
constitute the performance of duties under the Cal. Vehicle Code, § 2800 which
requires compliance with the lawful order, signal or direction of the peace
officer.
(Ord. MC-574, passed 1-8-1987)
§ 10.24.230 PROHIBITION FROM PARTICIPATING IN ROUTE 66 CRUISING EVENTS WITHOUT
REGISTRATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the Route 66 Cruising
Event without registering to participate in said event in accordance with the
procedures set up by the San Bernardino Convention and Visitor’s Bureau.
   (B)   Any person violating this provision is guilty of a misdemeanor or an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-1147, passed 8-5-2003)
CHAPTER 10.25: VEHICLES FOR SALE ON PUBLIC STREETS
Section
   
10.25.010   Findings
   
10.25.020   Authority
   
10.25.030   Definitions
   
10.25.040   On-street sales prohibited
   
10.25.050   Removal of vehicle authorized
   
10.25.060   Post-removal hearings required for removed vehicles
Editor’s note:
   This chapter is added by Ord. MC-1407, passed 9-15-2014.
§ 10.25.010 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds as follows.
   (A)   Persons and businesses are using city streets as de facto used car
lots to sell used vehicles.
   (B)   The act of selling a car in public streets invites prospective buyers
into the roadway to examine the vehicle. It is well known that prospective
buyers examine the condition of vehicles for sale and look for evidence of
damage or repairs. When done in the public roadway, this poses an obvious risk
to public and traffic safety that the city wishes to avoid.
   (C)   The parking of vehicles for sale on city streets creates a distraction
for drivers and pedestrians, thereby creating a further public safety hazard.
Because drivers may attempt to not only read a for sale sign in or on a vehicle
but also commit to memory, write down or call a telephone number on such a
sign, these signs pose a greater risk of accidents than do other types of signs
that may be displayed in or on a parked vehicle.
   (D)   The significant increase in vehicles parked for the purpose of sale
has created a nuisance by decreasing the parking available for local residents
and businesses.
   (E)   The city has an important and substantial public interest in
protecting public safety; reducing accidents; removing impediments to the
orderly flow of traffic, such as illegal and hazardous parking; abating public
nuisances; eliminating visual blight; preventing unlawful trafficking in stolen
vehicles; and protecting licensed car dealers from unfair competition.
(Ord. MC-1407, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 10.25.020 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the city by the
Cal. Vehicle Code, § 22651.9, which permits the removal of vehicles, under
certain conditions, for being illegally parked for purposes of advertising the
vehicle for sale. The Cal. Vehicle Code, § 22852 requires that a post removal
hearing take place after the removal of any vehicle under the Cal. Vehicle
Code, § 22651.9.
(Ord. MC-1407, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 10.25.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle as set forth by the Cal. Vehicle
Code, § 463.
   PEACE OFFICER. Any law enforcement officer as set forth by the Cal. Penal
Code, § 830.
   VEHICLE. Any device as set forth by the Cal. Vehicle Code, § 670, which is
defined as “a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or
drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.”
(Ord. MC-1407, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 10.25.040 ON-STREET SALES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park any vehicle on any street or public land when it
appears because of a sign, placard or any other indication written or posted on
the vehicle that the primary purpose of parking the vehicle at that location is
to advertise to the public the private sale of that vehicle. A person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any violation is committed, continued or permitted.
(Ord. MC-1407, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 10.25.050 REMOVAL OF VEHICLE AUTHORIZED.
   Pursuant to the Cal. Vehicle Code, § 22651.9, any peace officer, or any
regularly employed and salaried employee of the city who is engaged in
directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations, may remove the
vehicle located when the vehicle is found upon a street or any public lands, if
all of the following requirements are satisfied:
   (A)   Because of a sign, placard or any other indication written or posted
on the vehicle, it appears that the primary purpose of parking the vehicle at
that location is to advertise to the public the private sale of that vehicle;
   (B)   Within the past 30 days, the vehicle is known to have been previously
issued a notice of parking violation for violation of §
10.25.040, which was accompanied by a notice containing all of the following:
      (1)   A warning that an additional parking violation may result in the
impoundment of the vehicle;
      (2)   A warning that the vehicle may be impounded pursuant to this
section, even if moved to another street, so long as the signs or placards
offering the vehicle for sale remain on the vehicle; and
      (3)   A statement that all streets in the city are subject to
prohibitions of this chapter.
   (C)   The notice of parking violation was issued at least 24 hours prior to
the removal of the vehicle.
(Ord. MC-1407, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 10.25.060 POST-REMOVAL HEARINGS REQUIRED FOR REMOVED VEHICLES.
   A post-storage hearing, pursuant to the Cal. Vehicle Code, § 22852, applies
with respect to the removal of any vehicle pursuant to this section and is
incorporated by reference as if set forth in full herein.
(Ord. MC-1407, passed 9-15-2014)
CHAPTER 10.28: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
10.28.010   Standing on sidewalks
   
10.28.020   Walking upon new pavement or sidewalk prohibited
   
10.28.030   Reserved
   
10.28.040   Application of traffic-control signals
   
10.28.050   Scramble system of traffic-control
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on local authority to establish crosswalks, see Cal. Vehicle
Code, § 21106
   For provisions on local regulation of pedestrian crosswalk use, see Cal.
Vehicle Code, § 21961
§ 10.28.010 STANDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   In a business district, it is unlawful for any pedestrian to stand on the
sidewalk, except as near as is physically possible to the building line or the
curb line.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.28.020 WALKING UPON NEW PAVEMENT OR SIDEWALK PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to walk upon any newly made pavement or cement
or concrete sidewalk upon any street where across or around such street there
is a barrier, or at, or over or near which there is a person or sign warning
persons not to walk or drive over or across such street, or a sign stating that
the street is closed.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.28.030 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-161, passed 5-5-1982)
§ 10.28.040 APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever and wherever pedestrian traffic in the city is controlled by an
official traffic-control signal exhibiting the words “wait” in red colored
lights and “walk” in green colored lights, the lighted words shall apply to
pedestrians as follows:
   (A)   “Walk” in green lights: pedestrian facing the signal may proceed
across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk; and
   (B)   “Wait” in red lights: no pedestrian shall enter the roadway or cross
any part of the roadway against a red “wait” signal.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 1949, passed 7-22-1952)
§ 10.28.050 SCRAMBLE SYSTEM OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL.
   The City Council may, by resolution, establish at the intersections of
certain streets the “scramble system” of traffic-control for pedestrians, and
the Director of Public Services is authorized and required to install and
maintain the necessary traffic controls, and/or signs at or near such
intersections, and the Director of Development Services is authorized and
required to install and maintain the necessary traffic signals.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 2288, passed 3-8-1960; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
CHAPTER 10.32: BUSES AND RAILROAD TRAINS
Section
   
10.32.010   Boarding or alighting from buses
   
10.32.020   Unlawful riding
   
10.32.030   Railway trains and street cars not to block street
   
10.32.040   Speed of trains and cars upon public streets
   
10.32.050   Speed of trains over right-of-way
   
10.32.060   Railway gates
§ 10.32.010 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM BUSES.
   It is unlawful for any person to board or alight from any bus while such bus
is in motion.
(Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.32.020 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   It is unlawful for any person to ride on any bus upon any portion thereof
not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not
apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty.
(Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.32.030 RAILWAY TRAINS AND STREET CARS NOT TO BLOCK STREET.
   It is unlawful for the operator of any steam, interurban or street railway
train or car to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any
street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than eight minutes.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.32.040 SPEED OF TRAINS AND CARS UPON PUBLIC STREETS.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate, permit or
cause to be operated any engine, train, locomotive, steam train, electric car
or electric train over, across, upon or along any public street within the
city, except as specifically provided in §
10.32.050, at a rate of speed greater than one mile in three minutes.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.32.050 SPEED OF TRAINS OVER RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate, permit or
cause to be operated any engine, train, locomotive, steam train, electric car
or electric train upon the right-of-way now owned and operated by the Atchison,
Topeka and Santa Fe Railway, while crossing over, upon or along any public
street within the city at a rate of speed greater than 30 mph, except that the
speed may be increased to a rate of speed not greater than 40 mph in that
section north from Baseline Street to the limits of the city.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.32.060 RAILWAY GATES.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through or under any
safety gate or railroad barrier which is maintained at a railroad crossing for
the purpose of warning persons of the approach of a train or car, while such
gate or barrier is closed or while it is being opened or closed.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 10.36: LOADING ZONES, BUS STOPS AND CROSSWALKS
Section
   
10.36.010   Loading zones and bus stops to be painted or marked
   
10.36.020   Authorization to establish crosswalks
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on local authority to establish crosswalks, see Cal. Vehicle
Code, § 21106
   For provisions on local parking curb markings, see Cal. Vehicle Code, §
21458
§ 10.36.010 LOADING ZONES AND BUS STOPS TO BE PAINTED OR MARKED.
   The City Engineer shall determine, and the Director of Public Services shall
mark, the location of all loading zones and bus stops by causing the adjacent
curb to be painted or marked respectively yellow, white and red; that portion
so marked yellow shall be established as a loading zone, and the curb surface
so painted yellow shall have thereon in black letters the words “loading zone,”
and such loading zone so located and marked shall be used only as a place for
the loading or unloading of passengers or freight, subject to the limitations
prescribed; that portion painted white shall be established as a passenger
loading zone, and the curb surface painted white shall have thereon in black
letters the words “passenger loading zone,” and such passenger loading zone so
located and marked shall be used only as a place for the loading or unloading
of passengers; that portion painted red shall have thereon in white letters the
words “bus stops,” and such bus stop so located and marked shall be used only
as a place for the loading and unloading of passengers, subject to the
limitations herein prescribed, and the City Engineer may determine, and the
Director of Public Services shall mark, the location in front of and adjacent
to hospitals, police stations and theaters where it is unlawful to stop, stand
or park a vehicle by causing the adjacent curb to be painted or marked red.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 1730, passed 1-3-1945; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984)
§ 10.36.020 AUTHORIZATION TO ESTABLISH CROSSWALKS.
   The City Engineer is authorized and required to establish crosswalks,
approximately equal in width to the adjacent sidewalk at all intersections, or
between intersections, where, in his or her opinion, there is a particular
danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and when so designated by the City
Engineer, the Director of Public Services shall designate the crosswalks upon
the surface of the roadway by white painted lines.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
CHAPTER 10.38: DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
10.38.010   Definition
   
10.38.020   Posting of rules and regulations
   
10.38.030   Designation and marking of parking spaces
   
10.38.040   Operation of vehicles - compliance with traffic-control devices or
markings
§ 10.38.010 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT (hereinafter referred to as DRIVE-IN). A place of
business wherein beverages, foods or refreshments are served to patrons for
consumption on the premises at tables or stands in open or unenclosed areas, or
in any vehicle stopped, standing or parked in or upon the premises of the
DRIVE-IN, or in or upon any street, alley, land, parking area or grounds
immediately adjacent to such premises, or adjacent to or adjoining any street
or public right-of-way abutting such premises.
(Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.38.020 POSTING OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Persons owning, operating, managing or conducting a drive-in shall place in
conspicuous places at the drive-in at least four signs on which are written in
legible English, in letters at least two inches in height on contrasting
background, words or phrases requesting patrons to refrain from any conduct and
act prohibited by this chapter and by other rules and regulations desired by
the drive-in.
(Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.38.030 DESIGNATION AND MARKING OF PARKING SPACES.
   Persons owning, operating, managing or conducting a drive-in shall place, at
suitable locations on the premises, appropriate traffic-control devices and
signs, and markings on the pavement, as approved by the city, directing traffic
entering and leaving the establishment, and shall designate and mark parking
spaces for the parking of vehicles of patrons on the premises.
(Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.38.040 OPERATION OF VEHICLES - COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR
MARKINGS.
   It is unlawful for any person entering or leaving a drive-in to operate,
stop, stand or park a vehicle operated by him or her on any street or right-of-
way, in a manner contrary to any official traffic-control device, sign or
marking erected, installed or maintained, on a temporary or permanent basis, by
the city pursuant to law.
(Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 10.40: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY
Section
   
10.40.010   Report required
   
10.40.020   Accident reports confidential
§ 10.40.010 REPORT REQUIRED.
   The driver of a vehicle, or the person in charge of any animal, involved in
any accident resulting in damage to any property, publicly owned, including,
but not limited to, any fire hydrant, ornamental lighting post or ornamental
shade tree, located in or along any street or within any public park; or
resulting in damage to any property owned by any public utility, including, but
not limited to, a telephone pole, electric light or power pole, where the
damage exceeds $25, shall, within 24 hours after such accident, make, or cause
to be made, a written report of such accident to the City Police Department
upon forms furnished by the Police Department.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
§ 10.40.020 ACCIDENT REPORTS CONFIDENTIAL.
   All required accident reports shall be without prejudice to the individual
so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the Police Department,
except that the Police Department shall disclose the names and addresses of
persons involved in, or witnesses to, an accident; the registration numbers and
descriptions of vehicles involved; and the date, time and location of an
accident to any person who may have a proper interest therein, including the
driver or drivers involved, or the legal guardian thereof, the parent of a
minor driver, the authorized representative of a driver or to any person
injured therein and the owners of vehicles or property damaged thereby, or all
of them. No such report shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or
criminal, arising out of an accident, except that the Department shall furnish,
upon demand of any person who has or claims to have made such a report or upon
demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report has
or has not been made to the Police Department solely to prove a compliance or a
failure to comply with the requirement that such a report be made to the Police
Department.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941)
CHAPTER 10.44: VIOLATION - PENALTY
Section
   
10.44.010   Violation - penalty
   
10.44.020   Delinquent parking citations
§ 10.44.010 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of Article I of this title or any rule or
regulation made by the City Council by resolution or by the City Engineer or
Director of Public Services, pursuant thereto, is guilty of an infraction,
which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions
of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 1652, passed 3-18-1941; Ord. 3035, passed 12-16-1969; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 10.44.020 DELINQUENT PARKING CITATIONS.
   Unpaid parking citations which have not been contested are delinquent 30
days after issuance of the citation. Any citation which becomes delinquent
shall have a delinquency penalty and a Department of Motor Vehicles’ hold
charge added to the fine and cost of the citation. The amount of the
delinquency penalty and Department of Motor Vehicles’ hold charge shall be
established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-423, passed 11-9-1984)
ARTICLE II. SPECIFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 10.48: BICYCLES
Section
   
10.48.010   Definitions
   
10.48.020   License - required
   
10.48.030   License - registration forms - indicia - fees - renewal
   
10.48.040   Sale of bicycle - unique serial number required
   
10.48.050   Removal or destruction of bicycle number unlawful
   
10.48.060   Use of revenues from license fees
   
10.48.070   Records of registered bicycles to be maintained
   
10.48.080   Facilities for receipt of applications and license issuance
   
10.48.090   Authorization to arrest and issue notices
   
10.48.100   Violation an infraction
   
10.48.110   Impoundment and retention of bicycle for violation
Cross-reference:
   For additional regulations on bicycles, see
Chapter 10.24
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on bicycle licensing, see Cal. Vehicle Code, §§ 39000 et seq.
§ 10.48.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. Any device upon which a person may ride and which is propelled by
human power through a system of belts, chains or gears having either two or
three wheels (one of which is at least 20 inches in diameter, in tandem or
tricycle arrangement) or having a frame size of at least 14 inches.
   BICYCLE DEALER. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation which is
engaged, wholly or partly, in giving away or in the business of selling at
retail, bicycles, or buying or taking in trade bicycles for purposes of resale,
selling or offering for sale at retail, or otherwise dealing at retail in
bicycles, which bicycles number more than five in any one calendar year,
whether or not such bicycles are owned by such person or entity. The term also
includes agents or employees of such person or entity.
(Ord. 1950, passed 7-22-1952; Ord. 3488, passed 3-19-1975; Ord. 3795, passed 1-
9-1979)
§ 10.48.020 LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate any bicycle on any street, highway
or other public property within the jurisdiction of this city unless such
bicycle is licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1950, passed 7-22-1952; Ord. 3488, passed 3-19-1975; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985)
§ 10.48.030 LICENSE - REGISTRATION FORMS - INDICIA - FEES - RENEWAL.
   (A)   Pursuant to the Cal. Vehicle Code, Division 16.7, the City Police
Department shall obtain registration forms and original bicycle license indicia
and renewal license supplementary adhesive devices from the State Department of
Motor Vehicles and, upon written application by prospective licensees to the
Police Department, bicycle retailers and dealers and other designated agents,
bicycle license indicia and renewal license devices shall be issued in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   All original licenses issued prior to December 31, 1978, expired
on December 31, 1978. All original licenses issued on or after January 1, 1979
shall expire on December 31 of the second year following the year of issuance.
All renewal licenses are due on January 1 next following the expiration of the
prior license, and shall expire on December 31 of the third year following
expiration of the prior license. License fees shall be established by
resolution.
      (2)   Original license fees are due and payable on the purchase date of
the bicycle, and are delinquent if not paid within 30 days after such date.
Renewal license fees are due and payable on January 1 of the applicable year,
and are delinquent if not paid by February 15 of that year; provided that the
delinquency date for the calendar year 1979 shall be February 23, 1979. A
penalty as established by resolution shall be added to each delinquent license.
      (3)   The renewal of each license shall be indicated by a renewal
adhesive device, showing the expiration date, affixed parallel to and above or
below the license indicia. Renewal devices in succeeding years shall be of
different colors.
   (C)   The bicycle license, when issued for a bicycle, shall be the authority
for the bicycle to be operated on any street, road, highway or public property
within the jurisdiction of the city, except on the sidewalks thereof or other
public property prohibited from bicycle use.
   (D)   Each license plate shall bear a unique license number and shall be
permanently assigned to a bicycle.
   (E)   The original license plate and any renewal license plate shall be
affixed or impressed upon any bicycle so licensed and neither the original
license plate or any renewal license plate shall be removed from the bicycle
during the effective period of the license plate and renewal plate.
(Ord. 1950, passed 7-22-1952; Ord. 3488, passed 3-19-1975; Ord. 3795, passed 1-
9-1979)
§ 10.48.040 SALE OF BICYCLE - UNIQUE SERIAL NUMBER REQUIRED.
   (A)   No bicycle dealer shall sell any new bicycle in the city unless such
bicycle has permanently stamped or cast on its frame a serial number unique to
the particular bicycle of each manufacturer. Serial numbers shall be stamped or
cast in the head of the frame, either side of the seat down post tube, or the
bottom sprocket bracket.
   (B)   Each bicycle dealer shall supply to each purchaser of a new or
previously owned bicycle a record of the following information: name of dealer,
address of dealer, year and make of bicycle and serial number of bicycle.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every person who sells, transfers ownership or
otherwise disposes of any bicycle licensed under this chapter to report such
sale or transfer by notifying the Police Department of such transfer or
disposition together with the name and address of the person to whom the
bicycle was sold or transferred, and such report shall be made within ten days
of the date of the sale or transfer.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to
apply to the Police Department for a transfer of license registration therefor,
within ten days of such sale or transfer.
   (E)   Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed under this chapter changes
his or her address, he or she shall, within ten days, notify the Police
Department of the old and new address.
(Ord. 1950, passed 7-22-1952; Ord. 3488, passed 3-19-1975; Ord. 3795, passed 1-
9-1979)
§ 10.48.050 REMOVAL OR DESTRUCTION OF BICYCLE NUMBER UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to willfully and
maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number on any bicycle frame
licensed pursuant to this chapter or possess such bicycle frame with knowledge
that its number has been so removed, destroyed, mutilated or altered. It is
also unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license
plate, seal or registration certificate during the time in which such license
plate, seal or registration card is operative; provided, however, that nothing
in this chapter shall prohibit the Police Department from stamping numbers and
symbols on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on
which the number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes.
(Ord. 1950, passed 7-22-1952; Ord. 3488, passed 3-19-1975)
§ 10.48.060 USE OF REVENUES FROM LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Revenues from license fees shall be used for the support of this
chapter which shall include, but not be limited to, the purchase of original
and renewal bicycle license plates from the State Department of Motor Vehicles,
printing costs for report forms or reimbursement costs to bicycle dealers or
other designated agents for services rendered.
   (B)   In addition, such revenues shall be used to improve bicycle safety
programs and establish bicycle facilities, including bicycle paths and lanes
within the limits of the city, except that other bicycle license fee revenues
which, prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter,
were used for other purposes may continue to be used for the same purposes for
a period not to exceed one year from September 20, 1974, with the approval of
the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 1950, passed 7-22-1952; Ord. 3488, passed 3-19-1975)
§ 10.48.070 RECORDS OF REGISTERED BICYCLES TO BE MAINTAINED.
   The Police Department shall maintain records of each bicycle registered or
transferred. Such records shall include, but not be limited to, the license
number; the serial number of the bicycle; the make, type and the model of the
bicycle; and the name and address of the licensee. Records shall be maintained
during the period of validity of the license or until notification that the
bicycle is no longer to be operated.
(Ord. 1950, passed 7-22-1952; Ord. 3488, passed 3-19-1975)
§ 10.48.080 FACILITIES FOR RECEIPT OF APPLICATIONS AND LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   The Chief of Police is authorized to provide facilities for the receipt of
applications and issuing of licenses at locations in the city, elsewhere than
the Police Department in the Hall of Justice, and to provide due publicity
regarding the establishment of official license issuing locations.
(Ord. 1950, passed 7-22-1952; Ord. 3488, passed 3-19-1975)
§ 10.48.090 AUTHORIZATION TO ARREST AND ISSUE NOTICES.
   Any police officer, reserve police officer or law enforcement trainee is
authorized and empowered to arrest and issue notices to appear pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter and Cal. Penal Code, § 836.5 and Part 2, Title 3,
Chapter 5C (§§ 853.6 et seq.).
(Ord. 1950, passed 7-22-1952; Ord. 3488, passed 3-19-1975)
§ 10.48.100 VIOLATION AN INFRACTION.
   Every person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is
guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 1950, passed 7-22-1952; Ord. 3488, passed 3-19-1975; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985)
§ 10.48.110 IMPOUNDMENT AND RETENTION OF BICYCLE FOR VIOLATION.
   In addition to the penalty set forth in §
10.48.100, members of the City Police Department, or other authorized
personnel, may impound and retain possession of any bicycle operated in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and retain possession of
the same until the license provided for in this chapter is obtained by the
owner of the bicycle.
(Ord. 1950, passed 7-22-1952; Ord. 3488, passed 3-19-1975)
CHAPTER 10.52: SPEED LIMITS
Section
   
10.52.010    Twenty-five miles per hour
   
10.52.020    Thirty miles per hour
   
10.52.030    Thirty-five miles per hour
   
10.52.040    Forty miles per hour
   
10.52.050    Forty-five miles per hour
   
10.52.060    Fifty miles per hour
   
10.52.070    Fifty-five miles per hour
   
10.52.080 Erection of signs
§ 10.52.010 TWENTY-FIVE MILES PER HOUR.
   In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of Cal. Vehicle Code §§
22357, 22358, 22360, the Mayor and Common Council do hereby determine and
declare upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that a prima
facie speed limit of 25 mph shall be established upon the following streets or
portions thereof in the city:
 
28th STREET between H Street and Waterman Avenue
COMMERCIAL ROAD between Waterman Avenue and Steele Road
PALM AVENUE between Belmont Avenue and Melvin Avenue
RIALTO AVENUE between Lena Road and Tippecanoe Avenue
 
(Ord. MC-1651, passed 5-21-2025)
§ 10.52.020 THIRTY MILES PER HOUR.
   In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of Cal. Vehicle Code §§
22357, 22358, 22360, the Mayor and Common Council do hereby determine and
declare upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that a prima
facie speed limit of 30 mph shall be established upon the following streets or
portions thereof in the city:
2nd STREET between Mt. Vernon Avenue and Waterman Avenue
2nd STREET between Mt. Vernon Avenue and Waterman Avenue
21st STREET between Waterman Avenue and Perris Hill Park Road
ARROWHEAD AVENUE between Highland Avenue and Kendall Drive
CALIFORNIA STREET between Baseline Street and Cajon Boulevard
DEL ROSA DRIVE between 6th Street and Baseline Street
DEL ROSA AVENUE between Del Rosa Drive and Marshall Boulevard
E STREET between Mill Street and Rialto Avenue
E STREET between Rialto Avenue and 8th Street
ELECTRIC AVENUE between Mt. View Avenue and Northpark Boulevard
EUCALYPTUS AVENUE between Mill Street and Rialto Avenue
G STREET between Mill Street and 3rd Street/4th Street
H STREET between 3rd Street and 6th Street
HIGHLAND AVENUE between Muscupiabe Avenue and E Street
HIGHLAND AVENUE between E Street and Sierra Way
HIGHLAND AVENUE between Arden Avenue and Victoria Avenue
HILL DRIVE between Magnolia Drive and H Street
HOSPITALITY LANE between E Street and Waterman Avenue
HOSPITALITY LANE between Waterman Avenue and Tippecanoe Avenue
MARSHALL BOULEVARD between Ladera Road and Waterman Avenue
MASSACHUSETTS AVENUE between Baseline Street and Highland Avenue
MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE between 5th Street and Baseline Street
MORGAN ROAD between Melbourne Road and Yardley Street
MT. VERNON AVENUE between Grant Avenue and Rialto Avenue
MT. VERNON AVENUE between Rialto Avenue and 7th Street
MT. VERNON AVENUE between 7th Street and 21st Street
MT. VIEW AVENUE between Victoria Street and Highland Avenue
MT. VIEW AVENUE between Highland Avenue and Electric Avenue
MT. VIEW AVENUE between Electric Avenue and Hill Drive/Pinehurst Court
N. LITTLE between 600' S/ O W Little League Drive and O' Rourke Avenue
PALM AVENUE (EAST) between Atlantic Avenue and Piedmont Drive
PARKDALE DRIVE between Mt. View Avenue and Valencia Avenue
STATE STREET between University Parkway and Sheridan Road
UNIVERSITY PARKWAY between Highland Avenue and Baseline Street
 
(Ord. 2105, passed 4-3-1956; Ord. 3717, passed 4-19-1978; Ord. 3784, passed 11-
22-1978; Ord. MC-93, passed 9-2-1981; Ord. MC-282, passed 6-21-1983; Ord. MC-
449, passed 4-17-1985; Ord. MC-586, passed 3-26-1987; Ord. MC-842, passed 7-22-
1992; Ord. MC-1421, passed 4-18-2016; Ord. MC-1428, passed 9-6-2016; Ord. MC-
1651, passed 5-21-2025)
§ 10.52.030 THIRTY-FIVE MILES PER HOUR.
   In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of Cal. Vehicle Code §§
22357, 22358, 22360, the Mayor and Common Council do hereby determine and
declare upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that a prima
facie speed limit of 35 mph shall be established upon the following streets or
portions thereof in the city:
2nd STREET between Mt. Vernon Avenue and Waterman Avenue
21st STREET between Waterman Avenue and Perris Hill Park Road
27th STREET between Mt. Vernon Avenue and “G” Street
48th STREET between Kendall Drive and Electric Avenue
ARROWHEAD AVENUE between 7th Street and Highland Avenue
ARROWHEAD AVENUE between Highland Avenue and Thompson Place
ATLANTIC AVENUE between Palm Avenue and Cienega Court
“D” STREET between Highland Avenue and 28th Street
EUCALYPTUS AVENUE between Mill Street and Rialto Avenue
“G” STREET between 6th Street and 140 feet north of 29th Street
“G” STREET between 150 feet south of 30th Street and Marshall Boulevard
GILBERT STREET between Waterman Avenue and 207 feet east of Cedar Avenue
“H” STREET between 6th Street and Marshall Boulevard
HILL DRIVE between Magnolia Drive and H Street
HOSPITALITY LANE between “E” Street and Waterman Avenue
“K” STREET between Mill Street and Rialto Avenue
5th STREET between H Street and Sierra Way
5th STREET between Sierra Way and Pedley Road
6th STREET between Del Rosa Drive and 200' E/ O Victoria Avenue
16th STREET between University Parkway and Medical Center Drive
27th STREET between Mt. Vernon Avenue and G Street
48th STREET between Kendall Drive and Electric Avenue
ARDEN AVENUE between Pacific Street and Highland Avenue
ARROWHEAD AVENUE between 7th Street and Highland Avenue
ATLANTIC AVENUE between Palm Avenue and Cienega Court
AUTO CENTER DRIVE between Showcase Drive S and E Street
BASELINE STREET between H Street and Sierra Way
D STREET between 6th Street and 28th Street
DEL ROSA AVENUE between Marshall Boulevard and 39th Street
E STREET between Century Avenue and Mill Street
E STREET between 8th Street and Baseline Street
E STREET between Baseline Street and Highland Avenue
E STREET between Highland Avenue and 30th Street
E STREET between 30th Street and Kendall Drive
G STREET between Inland Center Drive and Mill Street
G STREET between 6th Street and 140' North Of 29th Street
G STREET between 150' South Of 30th Street and Marshall Boulevard
GILBERT STREET between Waterman Avenue and 207' E/O Cedar Avenue
H STREET between 6th Street and Marshall Boulevard
HIGHLAND AVENUE between Macy Street and Medical Center Drive
HIGHLAND AVENUE between Medical Center Drive and Muscupiabe Avenue
HIGHLAND AVENUE between Victoria Avenue and Bradford Avenue
HUNTS LANE between Washington Street and Commercial Road
HUNTS LANE between Commercial Road and Hospitality Lane
K STREET between Mill Street and Rialto Avenue
KENDALL DRIVE between E Street and 40th Street
LENA ROAD between Orange Show and Road Central Avenue
LENA ROAD between Mill Street and 3rd Street
LYNWOOD DRIVE between Valencia Avenue and Del Rosa Avenue
MACY STREET between Highland Avenue and North City Limits
MARSHALL BOULEVARD between Little Mountain Drive and Ladera Road
MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE between Baseline Street and Cajon Boulevard
MIRAMONTE AVENUE between 23rd Street and Marshall Boulevard
MOUNTAIN AVENUE between 39th Street and 40th Street
MT. VERNON AVENUE between 21st Street and 27th Street
OHIO AVENUE between Magnolia Avenue and Pine Avenue
ORANGE SHOW ROAD between E Street and Arrowhead Avenue
ORANGE STREET between Pacific Street and Highland Avenue
ORANGE STREET between Highland Avenue and Piedmont Drive
PEPPER AVENUE between Mill Street and Madrona Street
PIEDMONT DRIVE between Yuma Drive and Orange Street
RIALTO AVENUE between Eucalyptus Avenue and Mt. Vernon Avenue
RIALTO AVENUE between Mt Vernon Avenue and G Street
RIALTO AVENUE between G Street and Sierra Way
RIALTO AVENUE between Sierra Way and Waterman Avenue
RIALTO AVENUE between Waterman Avenue and Lena Road
SIERRA WAY between 5th Street and 30th Street
SIERRA WAY between 30th Street and 40th Street
TIPPECANOE AVENUE between Harriman Place and San Bernardino Avenue
VALENCIA AVENUE between 21st Street and 30th Street
W. LITTLE LEAGUE DRIVE between N. Little League Drive and Palm Avenue
 
(Ord. 2105, passed 4-3-1956; Ord. 3671, passed 9-2-1977; Ord. 3746, passed 8-
25-1978; Ord. 3849, passed 7-25-1979; Ord. 3854, passed 8-21-1979; Ord. 3959,
passed 8-8-1980; Ord. 3966, passed 9-10-1980; Ord. MC-81, passed 7-8-1981; Ord.
MC-93, passed 9-2-1981; Ord. MC-199, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. MC-282, passed 6-
21-1983; Ord. MC-434, passed 2-5-1985; Ord. MC-500, passed 2-18-1986; Ord. MC-
512, passed 4-22-1986; Ord. MC-586, passed 3-26-1987; Ord. MC-714, passed 4-2-
1990; Ord. MC-774, passed 3-12-1991; Ord. MC-842, passed 7-22-1992; Ord. MC-
848, passed 9-9-1992; Ord. MC-872, passed 5-26-1993; Ord. MC-1025, passed 7-7-
1998; Ord. MC-1042, passed 3-2-1999; Ord. MC-1111, passed 12-4-2001; Ord. MC-
1151, passed 10-8-2003; Ord. MC-1421, passed 4-18-2016; Ord. MC-1428, passed 9-
6-2016; Ord. MC-1491, passed 7-5-2018; Ord. MC-1502, passed 12-5-2018; Ord. MC-
1651, passed 5-21-2025)
§ 10.52.040 FORTY MILES PER HOUR.
   In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of Cal. Vehicle Code §§
22357, 22358, 22360, the Mayor and Common Council do hereby determine and
declare upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that a prima
facie speed limit of 40 mph shall be established upon the following streets or
portions thereof in the city:
3rd STREET between Sierra Way and Waterman Street
4th STREET between Tia Juana Street and Mt. Vernon Avenue
5th STREET between Sierra Way and Pedley Road
9th STREET between “H” Street and Sierra Way
9th STREET between Medical Center Drive and “H” Street
9th STREET between Sierra Way and Waterman Avenue
40th STREET between Electric Avenue and Waterman Avenue
40th STREET between Harrison Canyon Road North and Mountain Avenue
ARDEN AVENUE between Pacific Street and Highland Avenue
ARROWHEAD AVENUE between Esparanza Street and Rialto Avenue
BASELINE STREET between Medical Center Drive and “H” Street
BASELINE STREET between Sierra Way and Del Rosa Avenue
CALIFORNIA STREET between Baseline Street and Cajon Boulevard
CENTRAL AVENUE between Arrowhead Avenue and 100 feet east of Valley View Avenue
DEL ROSA AVENUE between Del Rosa Drive and Marshall Boulevard
“E” STREET between 30th Street and Kendall Drive
“E” STREET between Hunts Lane and Century Avenue
ELECTRIC AVENUE between 40th Street and Northpark Boulevard
FOOTHILL DRIVE between Del Rosa Avenue and Arden Avenue
GOLDEN AVENUE between Highland Avenue and Lynwood Drive
HIGHLAND AVENUE between Sierra Way and Valencia Avenue
HIGHLAND AVENUE between Valencia Avenue and Arden Avenue
INLAND CENTER DRIVE between “E” Street and 1570 feet southwest of “I” Street
LYNWOOD DRIVE between Valencia Avenue and Del Rosa Avenue
MACY STREET between Highland Avenue and North City Limits
MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE between Baseline Street and Highland Avenue
MERIDIAN AVENUE between Randall Avenue and Mill Street
MERIDIAN AVENUE between Rialto Avenue and Foothill Boulevard
MILL STREET between Bordwell Avenue and Waterman Avenue
MT. VERNON AVENUE between Grant Avenue and Rialto Avenue
MT. VIEW AVENUE between Highland Avenue and Electric Avenue
MT. VIEW AVENUE between Victoria Street and Highland Avenue
NORTHPARK BOULEVARD between Little Mountain Drive and Electric Avenue
NORTHPARK BOULEVARD between University Parkway and Little Mountain Drive
ORANGE SHOW ROAD between “E” Street and Arrowhead Avenue
3rd STREET between Sierra Way and Waterman Avenue
3rd STREET between Waterman Avenue and Lena Road
3rd STREET between Lena Road and Leland Norton Way
9th STREET between Medical Center Drive and H Street
9th STREET between H Street and Sierra Way
9th STREET between Sierra Way and Waterman Avenue
40th STREET between Electric Avenue and Waterman Avenue
40th STREET between Golden Avenue and Mountain Avenue
ARROWHEAD AVENUE between Esparanza Street and Rialto Avenue
BASELINE STREET between California Street and Medical Center Drive
BASELINE STREET between Medical Center Drive and H Street
BASELINE STREET between Sierra Way and Del Rosa Avenue
CENTRAL AVENUE between Arrowhead Avenue and 100' E/O Valley View Avenue
CENTRAL AVENUE between 100' E/O Valley View Avenue/Lena Road and Mt. View
Avenue
COMMERCIAL ROAD between Hunts Lane and Waterman Avenue
E STREET between Hunts Lane and Century Avenue
FOOTHILL DRIVE between Del Rosa Avenue and Arden Avenue
GOLDEN AVENUE between Highland Avenue and Lynwood Drive
HIGHLAND AVENUE between Sierra Way and Valencia Avenue
HIGHLAND AVENUE between Valencia Avenue and Arden Avenue
INLAND CENTER DRIVE between E Street and 1570' Sw/O I Street
KENDALL DRIVE between 40th Street and University Parkway
LITTLE MOUNTAIN DRIVE between Edgehill Road and 1300' S/ O Sheridan Road
LITTLE MOUNTAIN DRIVE between 1300' S/ O Sheridan Road and Northpark Boulevard
MERIDIAN AVENUE between Randall Avenue and Mill Street
MERIDIAN AVENUE between Rialto Avenue and Foothill Boulevard
MILL STREET between Eucalyptus Avenue and Macy Street
MILL STREET between Bordwell Avenue and Waterman Avenue
MILL STREET between Waterman Avenue and Tippecanoe Avenue
NORTHPARK BOULEVARD between University Parkway and Little Mountain Drive
NORTHPARK BOULEVARD between Little Mountain Drive and Electric Avenue
PALM AVENUE between Kendall Drive and Belmont Avenue
PEPPER AVENUE between Randall Avenue and Mill Street
PERRIS HILL PARK ROAD between Pacific Street and 21st Street
REDLANDS BOULEVARD between Hunts Lane and Gardena Street
SIERRA WAY between Mill Street and Rialto Avenue
SIERRA WAY between 40th Street and 48th Street
STERLING AVENUE between Highland Avenue and Pumalo Street
TIPPECANOE AVENUE between San Bernardino Avenue and 3rd Street
UNIVERSITY PARKWAY between Cajon Boulevard and Northpark Boulevard
VALENCIA AVENUE between 30th Street and 40th Street
WATERMAN AVENUE between Barton Road and Central Avenue
WATERMAN AVENUE between Rialto Avenue and Highland Avenue
WATERMAN AVENUE between Highland Avenue and 30th Street
 
(Ord. 2105, passed 4-3-1956; Ord. 3672, passed 9-16-1977; Ord. 3854, passed 8-
21-1979; Ord. 3874, passed 10-16-1979; Ord. 3959, passed 8-8-1980; Ord. MC-93,
passed 9-2-1981; Ord. MC-170, passed 6-8-1982; Ord. MC-438, passed 2-19-1985;
Ord. MC-449, passed 4-17-1985; Ord. MC-500, passed 2-18-1986; Ord. MC-586,
passed 3-26-1987; Ord. MC-842, passed 7-22-1992; Ord. MC-861, passed 2-16-1993;
Ord. MC-907, passed 7-6-1994; Ord. 1013, passed 1-13-1998; Ord. MC-1025, passed
7-7-1998; Ord. MC-1066, passed 3-7-2000; Ord. MC-1082, passed 9-6-2000; Ord.
MC-1083, passed 9-6-2000; Ord. MC-1111, passed 12-4-2001; Ord. MC-1123, passed
4-16-2002; Ord. MC-1164, passed 2-3-2004; Ord. MC-1382, passed 11-20-2012; Ord.
MC-1421, passed 4-18-2016; Ord. MC-1428, passed 9-6-2016; Ord. MC-1651, passed
5-21-2025)
§ 10.52.050 FORTY-FIVE MILES PER HOUR.
   In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of Cal. Vehicle Code §§
22357, 22358, 22360, the Mayor and Common Council do hereby determine and
declare upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that a prima
facie speed limit of 45 mph shall be established upon the following streets or
portions thereof in the city:
5th STREET between Del Rosa Drive and 200 feet east of Victoria Avenue
9th STREET between Waterman Avenue and 600 feet east of Preston Street
30th STREET between Little Mountain Drive and Valencia Avenue
40th STREET between Kendall Drive and Electric Avenue
40th STREET between Waterman Avenue and Harrison Canyon Road North
BASELINE STREET between California Street and Medical Center Drive
“D” STREET between 6th Street and Highland Avenue
DEL ROSA AVENUE between Marshall Boulevard and 39th Street
HUNTS LANE between Barton Road and Commercial Road
KENDALL DRIVE between “E” Street and 40th Street
LITTLE MOUNTAIN DRIVE between 27th Street and Northpark Boulevard
MILL STREET between Waterman Avenue and Tippecanoe Avenue
PALM AVENUE between Kendall Drive and Belmont Avenue
PEPPER AVENUE between Randall Avenue and Mill Street
REDLANDS BOULEVARD between Gardena Street and east city limits
RIALTO AVENUE between Eucalyptus Avenue and Mt. Vernon Avenue
SAN BERNARDINO AVENUE between Tippecanoe Avenue and Mt. View Avenue
TIPPECANOE AVENUE between 9th Street and Baseline Street
9th STREET between Waterman Avenue and 600' E/O Preston Street
30th STREET between Little Mountain Drive and Valencia Avenue
40th STREET between Kendall Drive and Electric Avenue
40th STREET between Waterman Avenue and Golden Avenue
BASELINE STREET between Meridian Avenue and California Street
CAMPUS PARKWAY between Kendall Drive and Devils Canyon Road
HARRISON STREET between 35th Street and 40th Street
KENDALL DRIVE between University Parkway and Palm Avenue
LITTLE MOUNTAIN DRIVE between 27th Street and Edgehill Road
ORANGE SHOW ROAD between Arrowhead Avenue and Tippecanoe Avenue
PINE AVENUE between Kendall Drive and Belmont Avenue
REDLANDS BOULEVARD between Gardena Street and East City Limits
SAN BERNARDINO AVENUE between Tippecanoe Avenue and Mt. View Avenue
TIPPECANOE between 9th Street and Baseline Street
VICTORIA AVENUE between Highland Avenue and Lynwood Drive
WATERMAN AVENUE between Central Avenue and Rialto Avenue
 
(Ord. 2105, passed 4-3-1956; Ord. 3365, passed 8-9-1973; Ord. MC-93, passed 9-
2-1981; Ord. MC-114, passed 11-16-1981; Ord. MC-199, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. MC-
449, passed 4-17-1985; Ord. MC-586, passed 3-26-1987; Ord. MC-615, passed 1-8-
1988; Ord. MC-698, passed 1-9-1990; Ord. MC-842, passed 7-22-1992; Ord. MC-988,
passed 12-17-1996; Ord. MC-1025, passed 7-7-1998; Ord. MC-1033, passed 11-3-
1998; Ord. MC-1042, passed 3-2-1999; Ord. MC-1043, passed 4-7-1999; Ord. MC-
1067, passed 3-7-2000; Ord. MC-1083, passed 9-6-2000; Ord. MC-1120, passed 3-
19-2002; Ord. MC-1421, passed 4-18-2016; Ord. MC-1428, passed 9-6-2016; Ord.
MC-1491, passed 7-5-2018; Ord. MC-1502, passed 12-5-2018; Ord. MC-1651, passed
5-21-2025)
§ 10.52.060 FIFTY MILES PER HOUR.
   In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of Cal. Vehicle Code §§
22357, 22358, 22360, the Mayor and Common Council do hereby determine and
declare upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that a prima
facie speed limit of 50 mph shall be established upon the following streets or
portions thereof in the city:
 
HALLMARK PARKWAY between University Parkway and Lexington Parkway
INDUSTRIAL PARKWAY between Lexington Parkway and Palm Avenue
KENDALL DRIVE between 40th Street and Palm Avenue
 
3rd STREET between Leland Norton Way and Victoria Avenue
CAJON BOULEVARD between California Street and 23rd Street
HIGHLAND AVENUE between West Boundary (~2664' West Of Macy Street) and Macy
Street
HALLMARK PARKWAY between University Parkway and Lexington Parkway
INDUSTRIAL PARKWAY between Lexington Parkway and Palm Avenue
 
(Ord. 2105, passed 4-3-1956; Ord. 3365, passed 8-9-1973; Ord. MC-93, passed 9-
2-1981; Ord. MC-438, passed 2-19-1985; Ord. MC-586, passed 3-26-1987; Ord. MC-
907, passed 7-6-1994; Ord. MC-988, passed 12-17-1996; Ord. MC-992, passed 4-8-
1997; Ord. MC-1067, passed 3-7-2000; Ord. MC-1082, passed 9-6-2000; Ord. 1341,
passed 12-1-2010; Ord. MC-1382, passed 11-20-2012; Ord. MC-1421, passed 4-18-
2016; Ord. MC-1428, passed 9-6-2016; Ord. MC-1651, passed 5-21- 2025)
§ 10.52.070 FIFTY-FIVE MILES PER HOUR.
   In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of the Cal. Vehicle Code,
§§ 22357, 22358 and 22360, the Mayor and City Council do determine and declare
upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that a prima facie
speed limit of 55 mph shall be established upon the following streets or
portions thereof in the city:
 
BASELINE STREET between Meridian Avenue and California Street
 
(Ord. MC-988, passed 12-17-1996; Ord. MC-1421, passed 4-18-2016; Ord. MC-1428,
passed 9-6-2016)
§ 10.52.080 ERECTION OF SIGNS.
   The Director of Public Services is ordered and directed to erect and
maintain, or cause to be erected and maintained, appropriate signs giving
notice of the prima facie speed limits established in this chapter along such
streets.
(Ord. 2105, passed 4-3-1956; Ord. 2392, passed 9-26-1961; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984)
CHAPTER 10.56: NOISE LIMITS
Section
   
10.56.010   Incorporation of state statutes
   
10.56.020   Muffler requirement
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on noise limits, see Cal. Vehicle Code, §§ 27200 through
27207
§ 10.56.010 INCORPORATION OF STATE STATUTES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate on public or private
property, other than public streets or highways, a motorcycle, motor-driven
cycle or any other motor vehicle at any time or under any condition of grade,
load, acceleration or deceleration in such a manner as to exceed the noise
limits established in the Cal. Vehicle Code, §§ 27200 through 27207 for such
motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or other vehicle based on a distance of 50 feet
from the path of travel within the speed limits specified in the Cal. Vehicle
Code, §§ 27200 through 27207.
   (B)   The provisions of the Cal. Vehicle Code, §§ 27200 through 27207 are
incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter wherever such
provisions may be made applicable without contravening division (A) above; and
any words and phrases contained in this section shall have the same meanings as
are set forth in the California Vehicle Code for such words and phrases when
such meanings are not in conflict with the intent of the Cal. Vehicle Code, §§
27200 through 27207.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3086, passed 6-30-1970; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-
15-1985)
§ 10.56.020 MUFFLER REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Every motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or motor vehicle shall, at all
times when being operated on public or private property other than public
streets or highways, be equipped with an adequate muffler in constant operation
and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise, and no such
muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with a cutout, bypass or similar
device.
   (B)   MUFFLER or any other word or phrase of this section, shall have the
meaning ascribed to such word or phrase in the California Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3086, passed 6-30-1970)
TITLE 11: RESERVED
[Reserved]
TITLE 12: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
   Chapter
      
12.03.   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS - EXCAVATIONS AND TEMPORARY ENCROACHMENTS
      
12.04.   RESERVED
      
12.05.   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS - WIRELESS FACILITIES
      
12.08.   RESERVED
      
12.12.   TELEGRAPH AND TELEPHONE POLES - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
      
12.16.   DATUM PLANE
      
12.20.   PUBLIC PROJECTS
      
12.21.   DESIGN-BUILD
      
12.24.   PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
      
12.28.   IMPROVEMENTS
      
12.30.   SIGHT DISTANCE REQUIREMENT
      
12.32.   HOUSE NUMBERS
      
12.36.   STREET GRADES
      
12.40.   STREET TREES
      
12.44.   OBSTRUCTIONS
      
12.48.   BRIDGES
      
12.52.   FIRE HYDRANTS
      
12.56.   PARADES
      
12.60.   VENDING NEAR PUBLIC SCHOOLS
      
12.64.   MOTION PICTURE AND TELEVISION PRODUCTION PERMITS
      
12.68.   PARK AND SCHOOL GROUNDS
      
12.72.   CLOCKS
      
12.76.   SECCOMBE LAKE PARK
      
12.80.   PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
      
12.84.   OFF-STREET PUBLIC PARKING
      
12.88.   HANG GLIDING
      
12.90.   ESTABLISHMENT, FINANCING AND OPERATION OF ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS
      
12.92.   CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND DRIVEWAYS
      
12.93.   CITY PARTICIPATION IN SIDEWALK/CURB REPAIR AND SEWER CONNECTION COSTS
      
12.94.   IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
      
12.95.   SUBSTANDARD DRIVEWAY APPROACHES
      
12.96.   INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF LANDSCAPED FRONTAGES ON CITY RIGHTS-
OF-WAY AND WITHIN THE BUILDING SETBACK AREA UP TO A MAXIMUM OF TWENTY FEET
      
12.98.   CAMPING ON PUBLIC STREETS AND PARKS
CHAPTER 12.03: RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS - EXCAVATIONS AND TEMPORARY ENCROACHMENTS
Section
   
12.03.010   Findings
   
12.03.020   Definitions
   
12.03.030   Notice to disconnect or remove
   
12.03.040   Power to regulate
   
12.03.050   Non-interference with franchise rights
   
12.03.055   Moratorium
   
12.03.060   Permit application
   
12.03.070   Fees
   
12.03.080   Reserved
   
12.03.090   Encroachment for lane closure
   
12.03.100   Inspection and plan review - deposit
   
12.03.110   Bonds, insurance, deposits
   
12.03.120   Notifications and guidelines
   
12.03.130   Completion of work and non-conforming work
   
12.03.140   Warranty of work - notice - repair by city
   
12.03.150   Abandonment of facilities
   
12.03.160   Permit expiration
   
12.03.170   Violations - penalty
§ 12.03.010 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Increasing public demand for services has prompted the expansion and
installation of new above and below ground facilities offered throughout the
city street and public right-of-way system.
   (B)   Increased usage of the public right-of-way has created congestion both
above and below ground and created competition for the available space.
   (C)   Congestion in the underground portions of the street right-of-way has
created conflicts between the various users in that the first users take the
available space leaving little or no room for other users. In some cases, the
city is prevented from installing needed expansions to water lines, sewers or
storm drains due to other users taking planned space for their own facilities.
   (D)   Continued use of public right-of-way has caused the degradation of
existing pavements and in some cases has been the cause of damage or
degradation to recently constructed or rehabilitated pavements, traffic signal
loops and pavement markings.
   (E)   It is the intent of the city to preserve its right to install
expansions to its own systems, protect investments in capital street
improvements and prevent overuse of the public right-of-way that would hamper
proper maintenance and operations of facilities.
   (F)   Continued excavations and encroachments into the public right-of-way
disrupt the traveling public as well as the business operators and pose
potential safety hazards unless controlled by permit and properly inspected.
   (G)   A public utility franchise, granted by the state or the city is a
contract granting special privileges to use public rights-of-way. It is not
intended that this chapter impose additional rules and regulations upon the
public utilities or confer authority to the city that conflicts with rights
granted by existing franchise agreements, the California Public Utilities Code
or jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission.
§ 12.03.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASPHALT STREET. Any street the surface of which is paved with a mixture of
rock, sand and asphalt cement, including any of those which are commonly known
as asphalt pavement.
   CONCRETE DRIVEWAY. Any driveway paved with portland cement concrete.
   CONCRETE GUTTER. Any gutter composed of portland cement concrete.
   CONCRETE STREET. Any street paved with portland cement concrete.
   CURB. Any curb constructed of portland cement concrete.
   ENCROACHMENT. To encroach upon, obstruct or close any public street, alley,
court, sidewalk or any portion thereof within the city, for any purpose,
including construction, parking, sales, advertising or any private usage of
public right-of-way.
   FACILITY. Physical structure of the facility, not what is contained in the
facility. Where protected by PUC regulations, it is not required to disclose
type of conductors or contents of the physical structure of the facility.
   LIGHTS. Shall conform to the requirements outlined in the current edition of
the “Manual of Traffic Controls,” published by the State of California.
   MANHOLE. Any surface structure which is part of any underground system, such
as sewer, storm drain, water, gas, ground pipes or wire system, and shall have
a surface cover with an exposed area of one and one-half square feet or more
and shall also include such structures of record that may have been overlaid
with surfacing materials.
   NEW FACILITY. A new distribution line or new service connection. Every
attempt shall be made to use existing service connections for proposed
developments or redevelopments. In the event the distribution line or service
connection is inadequate to serve a development, NEW FACILITY shall include the
necessary increase in size of distribution lines and service lines for the
facility only and/or the extension of service to reach the development.
   OILED STREET. Any street, the surface of which is composed of a mixture of
one or more spray coats of road oil with sand, compressed rock or decomposed
granite, or chemical dust palliative, having a thickness of one inch or less.
   PERSON. Any person as defined in §
1.04.010, and including any governmental agency or subdivision of any city or
county or the State of California.
   PROPERTY. Any property, rail, ties, wire, pipes, conduit or any device,
fixture, appliance or structure appurtenant thereto, installed, affixed or
located in or under any public street or public place in the city whether so
affixed, installed or located under franchise, or otherwise.
   PROSPECT HOLE. Any hole made in a pavement, driveway or sidewalk by driving
a metal bar, or drill into same for the purpose of locating existing utility
pipes, or conduits, or leaks therefrom or for explorations as to soil type,
depth to ground water, monitoring of ground water or pollution or other
monitoring activities.
   PUBLIC PLACE. A public place, public square, public park, public playground,
public court, public building and grounds, public airport and all public
grounds and places owned and maintained by the city.
   PUBLIC STREET. A public street, public easements, public right-of-way,
public highway, public alley, public way or public road within the city.
   ROCK AND OIL. Any street, the surface of which is composed of macadam
pavement, or a mixture of rock, sand and either road oil or liquid asphalt,
having a total thickness of more than one inch.
   TRENCH INFLUENCE AREA. An area three and one-half feet adjacent to the edge
of any trench where excavation occurs in the public right-of-way.
   UNIMPROVED STREET. Any street, the surface of which is composed of dirt,
soil, sand, gravel, decomposed granite or similar materials in their natural
state or a surface of inbound or waterbound gravel, or decomposed granite.
   VALVE/VALVE BOX/PULL BOX. Any access via surface structure which is part of
any underground system, such as sewer, storm drain, water, gas, ground pipes,
wire or cable systems, and has a surface cover with a surface area of less than
one and one-half square feet.
   WARNING SIGNS. Shall conform to the requirements of the “Manual of Traffic
Controls,” current edition, published by the State of California, and the “Work
Area Traffic Control Handbook” (“WATCH”), current edition, as adopted by the
City of San Bernardino.
(Ord. MC-1281, passed 8-19-2008)
§ 12.03.030 NOTICE TO DISCONNECT OR REMOVE.
   Whenever the Director of Development Services determines that it is
reasonable and necessary that any property located in or under any public
street, or public place in this city, owned, maintained or controlled by any
person, be temporarily disconnected, and reconnected, or permanently moved,
relocated or removed from any public street, or other public place, in order
that the city, or other governmental agency, or instrumentality, may most
economically, under modern engineering and construction methods install,
construct, build or erect any public improvement, or works in or under any
public street, the Director of Development Services shall give timely written
notice to the person owning, maintaining or controlling such property, to move,
relocate or temporarily disconnect the same, as may be determined by the City
Engineer.
(Ord. MC-1004, passed 10-21-1997; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.03.040 POWER TO REGULATE.
   (A)   The city shall adopt such regulations for the location, size, depth,
number of facilities to be accommodated, installation and repair methods and
surcharges for new or recently rehabilitated public streets that may require
excavations as it may deem necessary for public welfare. The regulations are
intended to protect the public right-of-way and equitably allocate available
space. In the event a utility cannot locate as directed by the city without
violation of PUC installation guidelines, then alternate alignments shall be
selected.
   (B)   Whenever an excavation is made by tunneling under the surface of the
street, the city shall adopt such regulations and require such inspections, as
it may deem necessary to ensure full compliance with the other sections of this
chapter.
   (C)   Whenever conduits are placed under city streets or in public rights-
of-way, the city will require the owner/user to ensure the conduits can be
located, with accuracy, by a reliable method. This shall mean a horizontal
location within four inches and depth within 18 inches.
   (D)   Plans shall be prepared and submitted that show the location, depth
and type of proposed facilities, as well as other existing underground
utilities. Such plans shall be to scale and no less than one inch equals 60
feet and shall show the right-of-way line, curb lines and all known underground
utilities, conduits or buried wires.
   (E)   City direction to relocate or locate in other positions to clear
existing or future facilities will be considered mandatory and not merely
recommendations. Failure to follow approved plans will result in the facility
being relocated as directed at the cost of the owner.
§ 12.03.050 NON-INTERFERENCE WITH FRANCHISE RIGHTS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as interfering with any rights
granted to any persons, firm or corporation under and by virtue of any
franchise of the state or of the city or to any rights granted in the future.
§ 12.03.055 MORATORIUM.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate, cut or open the
pavement surface of any street within five years after acceptance of the street
construction work by the City Engineer, with the exception of seal coated or
micro-surfaced streets, which shall be for a period of three years after
acceptance of the work by the City Engineer. This moratorium on street
excavations shall not apply if the Director of Development Services grants a
street excavation permit for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Excavation work that is mandated by city, county, state or federal
legislation or that is required as a condition of approval to a city issued
development permit;
      (2)   Utility service for development where no other reasonable means of
providing service exists, as determined by the Director of Development
Services;
      (3)   For a prospect hole, as defined in this chapter, to verify utility
depth or location;
      (4)   Excavations which are essential components of a regional project
which will provide a substantial public benefit;
      (5)   Written requests for state/federal mandated pipeline integrity
inspections; or
      (6)   Other situations where the Director of Development Services finds
that the excavation is necessary for the public health, safety or welfare.
   (B)   In the event of an emergency which endangers life or property, or for
an emergency repair or modification which is necessary to prevent interruption
of life essential utility services, excavation work may occur without first
obtaining a permit; however, written application for a permit shall be provided
the following business day.
   (C)   If a permit is granted by the Director of Development Services or
emergency excavation work as hereinabove described is performed, the following
conditions shall apply:
      (1)   All restoration and repair work shall be performed in accordance
with the most current trench, backfill and pavement replacement detail
standards in effect and as approved by the City Engineer;
      (2)   Provide a written pavement life performance warranty in a form
acceptable to the city, unless one is already provided through a franchise
agreement with the city. The warranty shall provide that in the event that
subsurface material or pavement over or within the trench influence area
becomes depressed, broken or otherwise fails at any time after the excavation
(or joint operation excavation) has been completed, that person shall repair or
reconstruct the subsurface and pavement to a condition to the satisfaction of
the City Engineer; and
      (3)   The person requesting the excavation permit or responsible for
emergency excavation work shall submit an application for an excavation permit,
pay all required fees and comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The moratorium on excavations shall not apply in any area where the
street pavement construction was completed five years prior to the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1281, passed 8-19-2008)
§ 12.03.060 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every permit for any excavation or encroachment in or under the
surface of any street shall be granted subject to the rights of this city, or
any other person entitled thereto, to make reasonable use of that part of the
street for any purpose for which the street may be lawfully used, consistent
with the excavation and/or encroachment made pursuant to such permit.
   (B)   It is unlawful to remove material from or engage in construction,
repair or installation of conduits within any street in such a manner as to
render such street impassable or dangerous to public travel. Closure of streets
must be approved in advance with approval of traffic detour plans submitted in
accordance with the guidelines prepared by the City Director of Development
Services.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to make excavations or encroachments in
or under the surface of any street, sidewalk or public place, for the
installation, repair or removal of any pipe, conduit, duct or tunnel, or for
any other purpose except the installation of poles and anchors serving overhead
lines without first:
      (1)   Making and filing a written application with the Director of
Development Services a minimum of 48 hours prior to starting any excavation or
encroachment, except any person or firm holding a public utility franchise in
the city may, for emergency purposes only, make and file a written application
during the next business day following the making of such emergency excavations
or encroachments;
      (2)   Receiving a written permit from the Director of Development
Services; and
      (3)   Making a deposit or other acceptable security to cover the cost of
installation including:
         (a)   Inspection;
         (b)   Restoring the street or sidewalk to its original condition;
         (c)   Restoring all signs, pavement markings, conduits, cables, pipes
to a condition acceptable to the city using similar materials and methods to
match the original improvements; and
         (d)   Incidental expenses in connection therewith, as hereinafter
provided for.
   (D)   Before issuing any permit provided for in this section, the Director
of Development Services shall require that a written application be made and
filed with the Department of Public Works which shall provide the following:
      (1)   Name and residence, or business address of applicant;
      (2)   A detailed description of the work, its location and approximate
area (in square feet) and the purpose for the excavation (installation, repair,
enhancement and the like); and
      (3)   A plat of the proposed work not larger than 24 inches by 36 inches
nor smaller than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches and at a scale not
smaller than one inch equals 60 feet showing the following:
         (a)   Right-of-way lines;
         (b)   Curb lines, back of sidewalk, street lights, traffic signal and
boxes;
         (c)   Location of proposed excavation including the length and width
of the trench;
         (d)   North arrow and scale;
         (e)   Street names and cross street (even if shown with broken
centerline to nearest cross street);
         (f)   All underground facilities with size, location and ownership
based on a search of available records. This is required for the full right-of-
way width for lines going in the general direction of the street and for the
length of the trench for excavations generally perpendicular to the street; and
         (g)   Such other information as the Director of Development Services
may require. No plats shall be required when excavations or encroachments are
made for service connections, or for locating or repairing existing underground
installations.
   (E)   Applicant must show legal authority to occupy and use the street or
sidewalk wherein the excavation/encroachment is proposed to be made.
   (F)   It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation, install or
maintain any tank, pipe, conduit, duct or tunnel, in or under the surface of
any street, or sidewalk or public place, at any location other than that
described in the application and shown on the plats filed by such person. Any
deviation in location necessitated by actual field conditions shall be
corrected on the final plats and submitted to the Director of Development
Services as the as constructed plats.
   (G)   The Director of Development Services may require site survey in order
to ensure accurate location of facilities as deemed necessary to ensure
compliance with this section.
   (H)   Those performing the work shall have a valid current city business
registration and shall list the number thereof on the application. The job
superintendent, as well as the owner’s authorized representative, shall also
provide 24-hour emergency telephone numbers should problems be discovered other
than during normal working hours and shall list the same on the application.
   (I)   The Director of Development Services may issue vehicle parking permits
that allow encroachment into time limited parking areas for extended work
periods. See §
12.03.090.
(Ord. MC-1004, passed 10-21-1997; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.03.070 FEES.
   (A)   Before a right-of-way excavation/ encroachment permit is issued, the
person making the application shall pay the city a non-refundable right-of-way
construction permit fee as established by resolution.
   (B)   (1)   Public utilities approved by the Director of Development
Services may obtain a right-of-way blanket permit for minor work and emergency
work. Applicants shall pay a non-refundable blanket permit fee as established
by resolution. A blanket permit will be valid for 12 months from the date of
issuance.
      (2)   MINOR WORK is defined as cable location and repair; constructing,
modifying or abandoning individual service connections; maintaining and/or
operating existing facilities; installing protection and electrical
disconnecting equipment; and other equivalent minor work within local
residential streets and easements. Construction or replacement of new
distribution and transmission facilities, work within arterial or collector
roads or highways or any other activity not construed to be MINOR WORK will
require individual permits.
      (3)   EMERGENCY WORK is defined as work necessary to repair damage to
existing facilities and/or reestablish service. Work done under a blanket
permit shall not require submittal of detailed plans as required by §
12.30.060 unless deemed necessary by the Director of Development Services.
   (C)   Other public agencies may obtain a no fee preliminary permit in order
to complete the review process and obtain any permit requirements. Prior to any
work being done under this preliminary permit, the person or contractor that
will perform the work must obtain a right-of-way permit and pay all associated
permit fees and deposits.
   (D)   Applicants obtaining a permit for the purpose of installing sewer
laterals and making connection to existing sewer lines will need to provide
evidence (receipts) to the Director of Development Services showing that sewer
capacity fees (paid to the City Municipal Water Department) and sewer
connection fees (paid to the Development Services Department) have been paid
for the property being connected.
(Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.03.080 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 12.03.090 ENCROACHMENT FOR LANE CLOSURE.
   (A)   Closure of traffic lanes on arterial and collector streets as
designated in the city’s general plan circulation element shall be avoided
between the morning and evening peak hours to accommodate traffic operations.
Generally, the period from 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. constitutes the morning peak
and the period from 3:30 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. constitutes the evening peak. Peak
flow need only be addressed weekdays (Monday through Friday).
   (B)   Permits shall be required for excavations/encroachments that will
occur at the places and times specified in division (A) above and shall be
assessed an additional fee, as determined by resolution, for each day of the
closure or operation.
   (C)   Emergency closures shall not require an encroachment permit. The
owner/contractor completing the work shall notify the Director of Development
Services immediately by telephone or telecopier or in person of such emergency
closures. As used in this section, EMERGENCY means an actual, threatened or
anticipated incident or situation which seriously threatens the public health
and safety. In the event such emergency closures present a hazard or serious
impact on the traveling public, the owner/contractor shall pay the city actual
costs for traffic control officers, personnel or equipment dispatched to
correct the traffic disruption. These actual costs shall be over and above any
blanket permit, lane closure or after the fact permit issued.
   (D)   All traffic lane closures shall follow the advance warning and safety
signing as required by the “WATCH Manual” or other approved traffic-control
manual. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute sufficient grounds
for the city to issue a stop work order.
   (E)   Projects involving the use of “Rule 20” funds or being done at the
request of the city in relation to other ongoing city projects are exempt from
the provisions of this section.
§ 12.03.100 INSPECTION AND PLAN REVIEW - DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Before excavation/encroachment permits are issued, a deposit to cover
the estimated cost of the inspection, plan review and repair/replacement costs
shall be paid to the city. Franchise holders who have repair/replacement
language within the franchise agreement or who have previously undertaken all
repair/replacement obligations need only provide inspection and plan review
fees. Both inspection and plan review will be charged as a percentage of the
estimated construction cost with a minimum basic fee to cover administrative
costs associated with the permit and plan review/inspections. Public utilities
performing work under a blanket permit, in lieu of providing the inspection and
plan review deposit, shall be billed quarterly for costs based on construction
activities and plan reviews conducted for the public utilities, by the city, in
public rights-of-way and public places.
   (B)   Plan reviews shall be submitted to the Department of Development
Services for review and comment. Two plans shall be submitted and no permits
shall be issued or construction started, until the plan review has been
completed and plans approved.
   (C)   No portion of the deposit for repair/replacement costs shall be
returned until all work has been satisfactorily completed and all markings,
signs, conduits and systems are returned to working order or replaced in kind.
This shall also include the removal of pavement markings made to locate
underground utilities and facilities and used by the contractor for
construction purposes. The street shall be returned to a condition that
reflects no evidence of the construction activities. Depending on the location
of and direction of the excavation, the contractor may be required to pave to
limits of two feet each side of the trench, from the curb to the first lane
line, a full lane width, a full half street section or the entire street
section should the trench be skewed or impact both sides of the street. Surface
treatments, such as chip seal and slurry seal, may be considered based on the
condition of the street and area of the patch.
(Ord. MC-1004, passed 10-21-1997; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.03.110 BONDS, INSURANCE, DEPOSITS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in the Cal. Streets and Highways Code, §
1468, before an excavation/encroachment permit is issued, a deposit in an
amount of the estimated construction cost, as determined by the Director of
Development Services, shall be paid to the city for damages and as indemnity
for any damages, which may be caused by the permitted excavation or
obstruction; or in lieu of such deposit, post security in a form approved by
the City Attorney.
      (2)   Security shall indemnify the city for any damages and shall be
further conditioned upon the compliance by the applicant with all provisions of
this chapter. Such deposit or security shall be for 100% of the estimated
construction cost, as determined by the Director of Development Services, to
guarantee faithful performance of all work, in a manner satisfactory to the
city, and that all materials and workmanship will be free from original or
developed defects. The deposit or security will remain in effect until the end
of all warranty periods set forth in this chapter. Changes in the work or
extensions of time shall in no way release the applicant or surety from its
obligations.
   (B)   (1)   Applicant shall furnish to the city a policy or certificate of
liability insurance in which the city is the named insured or is named as an
additional insured with the applicant. Franchised utilities doing work with
their own forces shall not be required to submit insurance certifications or
policies. Notwithstanding any inconsistent statement in the policy or any
subsequent endorsement, the city shall be the insured or as an additional
insured covering the work whether liability is attributable to the applicant or
the city.
      (2)   The policy shall ensure the city, its officers, employees and
agents, while acting within the scope of their duties on the permit, against
all claims arising out of or in connection with the work. Coverage shall be in
accordance with the current edition of the “Standard Specifications for Public
Works Construction” (Green Book), § 7-3. The applicant shall indemnify, defend
and hold harmless the city, its officers and agents from all damages, costs or
expenses in law or equity that may, at any time, arise or be set up because of
damages to property, or of personal injury received by reason or in the course
of performing work, which may be caused by any willful or negligent act or
omission by the applicant, or any of the applicant’s employees or contractors.
The city will not be liable for any accident, loss or damage to the work prior
to its completion and acceptance.
      (3)   All liability insurance policies shall bear an endorsement or shall
have attached a rider whereby it is provided that, in the event of expiration
or proposed cancellation of such policies for any reason whatsoever, the city
shall be notified by registered mail, return receipt requested, giving a
sufficient time before the date thereof to comply with any applicable law or
statute, but in no event less than 30 days before expiration or cancellation is
effective.
      (4)   The applicant shall be required, on the permit, to affirm that they
have a certificate of consent to self-insure, or a certificate of workers’
compensation insurance, or a certified copy thereof (Cal. Labor Code, § 3800)
or sign a certificate of exemption from workers’ compensation insurance (work
over $100 valuation). Said certification shall certify the applicant shall not
employ any person in any manner so as to become subject to the Workers’
Compensation Laws of California in the performance of the work. After making
such certification, should the applicant become subject to workers’
compensation provisions of the California Labor Code, applicant must forthwith
comply with the same or the permit shall be deemed revoked.
   (C)   Owner occupants or owner builders shall not be required to provide
said insurance certificates for work with a value under $5,000. Owner occupants
or owner builders shall however be bound by the provisions of division (B)
above as it relates to indemnification and defense of the city and liability
for accident, loss or damage to property or for personal injury. The owner
occupant’s or the owner builder’s signature on the application will attest to
their understanding and acceptance of the liability exposure for work done by
owner occupants or owner builders. Owners or builders shall declare that they
are exempt from the Contractor’s License Law and as the owner of the property
that they or their employees, with wages as their sole compensation, will do
the work and it is not intended or offered for sale. Contractor’s License Law
does not apply to an owner of property who builds or improves thereon and who
does such work themselves or through their own employees; provided that such
improvements are not intended or offered for sale. If, however, the improvement
is sold within one year of completion, the owner or builder will have the
burden of proving that they did not build or improve for the purpose of sale.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, a
contractor who has been awarded a competitive bid by the city for a public
project involving street excavation or cutting shall not be required to file a
bond or special deposit under this section to cover the cost of repairing or
replacement of street surface excavated or damaged; provided that the
contractor’s bid documents or contract require that they perform such street
repair or replacement as a part of the awarded project and that they so perform
in a manner satisfactory to the Director of Development Services and in
accordance with all provisions of this section.
   (E)   An agreement between the Redevelopment Agency and the city in a form
satisfactory to the City Attorney unconditionally providing and guaranteeing
that the agency provide and pay for those excavations/encroachments and other
costs required pursuant to the provisions of this section may be filed with the
Director of Development Services as security in lieu of the bond, cash or
certificate of deposit whenever the excavations/encroachments are located in a
redevelopment project area and the agreement recites that the excavations/
encroachments are in compliance with the redevelopment plan for the area and in
furtherance of the public interest in promoting public or private development.
(Ord. MC-1004, passed 10-21-1997; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Contractor’s License Law, see Cal. Business and Professions Code, Division
3, Chapter 9 (commencing with § 7000)
   Workers’ Compensation Laws of California, see Cal. Labor Code (commencing
with § 3200) and Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 8
§ 12.03.120 NOTIFICATIONS AND GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Twenty-four hours prior to commencing any work within any public
right-of-way or public place, the applicant shall notify the Department of
Development Services, Field Engineering Section, to arrange for inspection
service. All work shall be performed under the inspection and authority of the
Director of Development Services, or his or her authorized representative, and
shall comply with this chapter and the policy concerning excavations/
encroachments.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to make any excavations in any street or
sidewalk without maintaining safe crossings for vehicle traffic at all street
intersections, alleys and private driveways, and safe crossing for pedestrians
at intervals of not more than 300 feet. If any excavation is made across any
street or alley, at least one safe crossing shall be maintained at all times
for vehicles and pedestrians. Free access must be provided and maintained to
all fire hydrants and water valves.
(Ord. MC-1004, passed 10-21-1997; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.03.130 COMPLETION OF WORK AND NON-CONFORMING WORK.
   (A)   After work under the permit is commenced, the applicant shall perform
the work with due diligence, and so as not to obstruct any street, alley,
sidewalk or public place, or travel thereon more than is actually necessary. If
the work is not so performed, or if the work does not, in the judgment of the
Director of Development Services, comply with the terms of this chapter, the
Director of Development Services shall notify the applicant, in writing, that
the work is not performed with due diligence, or that the work has not been
properly done, and require the applicant, within three days after service of
such notice, to diligently proceed with said work or properly complete the
same. If the applicant fails to comply with such notice, the Director of
Development Services shall do whatever work is necessary to restore the street,
alley, sidewalk or public place to the same condition as existed before work
began.
   (B)   The applicant shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city
in the restoration and enforcement actions pursuant to this section.
(Ord. MC-1004, passed 10-21-1997; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.03.140 WARRANTY OF WORK - NOTICE - REPAIR BY CITY.
   (A)   The applicant shall warrantee the fitness of all work for the period
of one year, or as specified in franchise agreements, after completion of said
work against all defects in workmanship or materials. Whenever, within said
period of one year, any public improvement so warranted becomes in need of
repairs, by reason of any defect in workmanship or material, the Director of
Development Services shall serve on the applicant written notice stating what
repairs are necessary and requiring such repairs to be made within three days
after receipt of said notice. If the applicant fails to comply with such
notice, the Director of Development Services shall proceed to make such
repairs.
   (B)   The applicant shall be responsible for all costs, including materials,
labor and administration, necessary to repair or replace defective work. Such
funds shall be withheld from the bonds or security deposit submitted by the
applicant until reimbursement is made or other acceptable arrangement for
payment has been established.
(Ord. MC-1004, passed 10-21-1997; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.03.150 ABANDONMENT OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   When abandonment of existing facilities is contemplated, the utility
shall make every effort to utilize the current alignment and location for the
proposed new facilities thereby preserving the available right-of-way. In the
event this is impractical or technically infeasible, the owner/user shall be
responsible for the removal of the abandoned facility.
   (B)   Abandoned facilities may be removed when new facilities are installed
or may be deferred until such time as the abandoned facility conflicts with
proposed new development or the installation of any new facilities. The owner
shall coordinate the removal and disposal of the abandoned facilities with the
contractor making the new improvements. The owner shall be fully responsible
for the disposal of the ducts, conduits, conductors, pipes, fittings and all
other portions of the abandoned work and for any hazardous materials that may
be present in any of the abandoned facilities. Should contamination be evident
in the surrounding soils, the owner shall investigate and mitigate the
contamination.
   (C)   The owner shall maintain records of such abandoned facilities and
shall show such abandoned facilities on any requests to locate facilities when
there is a reasonable expectation of conflict with the proposed construction.
Such facilities shall be clearly designated as abandoned and upon request the
owner shall supply information on the material present.
§ 12.03.160 PERMIT EXPIRATION.
   (A)   If, after a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter, and
construction has not commenced within 60 days after the date thereof or other
date set forth in the permit, then such permit shall become void. Before work
commences, the applicant must obtain a new permit and pay the usual fee. The
applicant may request, in writing, that the Director of Development Services
extend the permit time but such requests shall be made prior to the 60-day
expiration date. The request shall state the reasons for the extension, the
duration of the extension request and shall provide justification for not
beginning the work within the first 60 days. Deposits made on the value of the
work may be released upon request of the applicant after the applicant submits
evidence of the proper completion of the work or evidence that the permit
terminated prior to the commencement of the work. Fees for plan review and
inspections performed will not be reimbursed nor applied to re-submittal for a
permit for the same area.
   (B)   Preliminary permits that have been issued to a public agency under the
provisions of this chapter but for which an excavation/encroachment permit has
not been issued or work commenced within one year of issuance of the
preliminary permit, or other date set forth on the permit, shall become void.
Re-submittal of the preliminary permit will be required to reactivate the
process.
   (C)   Permits for encroachments into the public right-of-way shall not be
granted for any period longer than 30 days.
(Ord. MC-1004, passed 10-21-1997; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.03.170 VIOLATIONS - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010. The enforcement of the penal provisions in this section shall not bar
the city from pursuing any other remedies permitted by law.
(Ord. MC-1004, passed 10-21-1997)
CHAPTER 12.04: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1004, passed 10-21-1997)
CHAPTER 12.05: RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS - WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section
   
12.05.010   Purpose
   
12.05.020   Definitions
   
12.05.030   Scope
   
12.05.040   Administration
   
12.05.050   General standards for wireless facilities in the public rights-of-
way
   
12.05.060   Applications
   
12.05.070   Findings; decisions; consultants
   
12.05.080   Conditions of approval
   
12.05.090   Breach; termination of permit
   
12.05.100   Infrastructure controlled by city
   
12.05.110   Non-discrimination
§ 12.05.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a process for managing, and
uniform standards for acting upon, requests for the placement of wireless
facilities within the public rights-of-way of the city, consistent with the
city’s obligation to promote the public health, safety and welfare; to manage
the public rights-of-way; and to ensure that the public is not incommoded by
the use of the public rights-of-way for the placement of wireless facilities.
The city recognizes the importance of wireless facilities to provide high
quality communications service to the residents and businesses within the city,
and the city also recognizes its obligation to comply with applicable federal
and state law regarding the placement of personal wireless services facilities
in its public rights-of-way. This chapter shall be interpreted consistent with
those provisions.
(Ord. MC-1560, passed 6-16-2021)
§ 12.05.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. A person filing an application for placement or modification of a
wireless facility in the public right-of-way.
   APPLICATION. A formal request, including all required and requested
documentation and information, submitted by an applicant to the city for a
wireless encroachment permit.
   BASE STATION. Shall have the meaning as set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b)
(1), or any successor provision.
   ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST. Shall have the meaning as set forth in 47
C.F.R. § 1.6100(b)(3), or any successor provision.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission or its lawful successor.
   MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE. City owned or controlled property structures,
objects and equipment in the ROW, including, but not limited to, street lights,
traffic control structures, banners, street furniture, bus stops, billboards or
other poles, lighting fixtures or electroliers located within the ROW.
   PERMITTEE. Any person or entity granted a wireless encroachment permit
pursuant to this chapter.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES. Shall have the same meaning as set forth in 47
U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(i).
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITY. A wireless facility used for the
provision of personal wireless services.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY or ROW. Shall have the same meaning as public street in
§
12.03.020, but shall also include any portion of any road or public way which
the city has the responsibility to maintain or manage.
   SMALL CELL FACILITY. Shall have the same meaning as small wireless facility
in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6002(1), or any successor provision (which is a personal
wireless services facility that meets the following conditions that, solely for
convenience, have been set forth below).
      (1)   The facility:
         (a)   Is mounted on a structure 50 feet or less in height, including
antennas, as defined in 47 C.F.R. § l.1320(d);
         (b)   Is mounted on a structure no more than 10% taller than other
adjacent structures; or
         (c)   Does not extend an existing structure on which it are located to
a height of more than 50 feet or by more than 10%, whichever is greater.
      (2)   Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated
antenna equipment (as defined in the definition of antenna in 47 C.F.R. §
l.1320(d)), is no more than three cubic feet in volume;
      (3)   All other wireless equipment associated with the structure,
including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-
existing associated equipment on the structure, is no more than 28 cubic feet
in volume;
      (4)   The facility does not require antenna structure registration under
47 C.F.R. pt. 17;
      (5)   The facility is not located on Tribal lands, as defined under 36
C.F.R. § 800.16(x); and
      (6)   The facility does not result in human exposure to radio frequency
radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified in 47 C.F.R. §
1.1307(b).
   SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any structure capable of supporting a base station.
   TOWER. Any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any
FCC licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including
structures that are constructed for personal wireless services, including, but
not limited to, private, broadcast and public safety services, as well as
unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services, such as microwave
backhaul, and the associated site. This definition does not include utility
poles.
   UNDERGROUND AREAS. Those areas where there are no electrical facilities or
facilities of the incumbent local exchange carrier in the right-of-way; or
where the wires associated with the same are or are required to be located
underground; or where the same are scheduled to be converted from overhead to
underground. Electrical facilities are distribution facilities owned by an
electric utility and do not include transmission facilities used or intended to
be used to transmit electricity at nominal voltages in excess of 35,000 volts.
   UTILITY POLE. A structure in the ROW designed to support electric, telephone
and similar utility lines. A tower is not a UTILITY POLE.
   WIRELESS ENCROACHMENT PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter
authorizing the placement or modification of a wireless facility of a design
specified in the permit at a particular location within the ROW; and the
modification of any existing support structure to which the wireless facility
is proposed to be attached.
   WIRELESS FACILITY or FACILITY. The transmitters, antenna structures and
other types of installations used for the provision of wireless services at a
fixed location, including, without limitation, any associated tower(s), support
structure(s) and base station(s).
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. A person that owns, controls, operates or
manages a wireless facility or portion thereof within the ROW.
   WIRELESS REGULATIONS. Those regulations adopted pursuant to 5 C.F.R. § 5 and
implementing the provisions of this chapter.
   WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER. An entity that provides personal wireless
services to end users.
(Ord. MC-1560, passed 6-16-2021)
§ 12.05.030 SCOPE.
   (A)   In general. There shall be a type of encroachment permit, entitled a
“wireless encroachment permit,” which shall be subject to all of the same
requirements as an encroachment permit would under Chapter 12.03 in addition to
all of the requirements of this chapter. Unless exempted, every person who
desires to place a wireless facility in the public rights-of-way or modify an
existing wireless facility in the public rights-of-way must obtain a wireless
encroachment permit authorizing the placement or modification in accordance
with this chapter. Except for small cell facilities, facilities qualifying as
eligible facilities requests or any other type of facility expressly allowed in
the public right-of-way by state or federal law, no other wireless facilities
shall be permitted pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Exemptions. This chapter does not apply to:
      (1)   The placement or modification of facilities by the city or by any
other agency of the state solely for public safety purposes; and
      (2)   Installation of a “cell on wheels,” “cell on truck” or a similar
structure for a temporary period in connection with an emergency or event, but
no longer than required for the emergency or event; provided that installation
does not involve excavation, movement or removal of existing facilities.
   (C)   Other applicable requirements. In addition to the wireless
encroachment permit required herein, the placement of a wireless facility in
the ROW requires the persons who will own or control those facilities to obtain
all permits required by applicable law, and to comply with applicable law,
including, but not limited to, applicable law governing radio frequency (“RF”)
emissions.
   (D)   Pre-existing facilities in the ROW. Any wireless facility already
existing in the ROW as of the date of this chapter’s adoption shall remain
subject to the standards and conditions of this code in effect prior to this
chapter, unless and until a renewal of such facility’s then existing permit is
granted, at which time the provisions of this chapter shall apply in full force
going forward as to such facility. The review of any request for a renewal of a
permit for such pre-existing facilities shall be conducted pursuant to this
chapter, rather than the portion(s) of this code that it was previously
reviewed under.
   (E)   Public use. Except as otherwise provided by state law, any use of the
public right-of-way authorized pursuant to this chapter will be subordinate to
the city’s use and use by the public.
(Ord. MC-1560, passed 6-16-2021)
§ 12.05.040 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Reviewing authority. The Director of Public Works (“the Director”), or
his or her designee, is responsible for administering this chapter. As part of
the administration of this chapter, the Director may:
      (1)   Interpret the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Develop and implement standards governing the placement and
modification of wireless facilities consistent with the requirements of this
chapter, including regulations governing collocation and resolution of
conflicting applications for placement of wireless facilities;
      (3)   Develop and implement acceptable designs and development standards
for wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way, taking into account the
zoning districts bounding the public rights-of-way;
      (4)   Develop forms and procedures for submission of applications for
placement or modification of wireless facilities, and proposed changes to any
support structure consistent with this chapter;
      (5)   Determine the amount of and collect, as a condition of the
completeness of any application, any fee established by this chapter;
      (6)   Establish deadlines for submission of information related to an
application, and extend or shorten deadlines where appropriate and consistent
with state and federal laws and regulations;
      (7)   Issue any notices of incompleteness, requests for information or
conduct or commission such studies as may be required to determine whether a
permit should be issued;
      (8)   Require, as part of, and as a condition of, completeness of any
application, notice to members of the public that may be affected by the
placement or modification of the wireless facility and proposed changes to any
support structure;
      (9)   Subject to appeal as provided herein, determine whether to approve,
approve subject to conditions or deny an application; and
      (10)   Take such other steps as may be required to timely act upon
applications for placement of wireless facilities, including issuing written
decisions and entering into agreements to mutually extend the time for action
on an application.
   (B)   Appeal.
      (1)   Any person adversely affected by the decision of the Director,
pursuant to this chapter, may appeal the Director’s decision to the hearing
officer, as the term is defined in §
9.94.010, which may decide the issues de novo, and whose written decision will
be the final decision of the city. An appeal by a wireless infrastructure
provider must be taken jointly with the wireless service provider that intends
to use the personal wireless services facility.
      (2)   Where the Director grants an application based on a finding that
denial would result in a prohibition or effective prohibition under applicable
federal law, the decision shall be automatically appealed to the hearing
officer, consistent with provisions as provided in
Chapter 9.94. All appeals must be filed within two business days of the written
decision of the Director, unless the Director extends the time therefor. An
extension may not be granted where extension would result in approval of the
application by operation of law.
      (3)   Any appeal shall be conducted so that a timely written decision may
be issued in accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. MC-1560, passed 6-16-2021)
§ 12.05.050 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR WIRELESS FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-
WAY.
   (A)   Generally. Wireless facilities in the ROW shall meet the minimum
requirements set forth in this chapter and the wireless regulations, in
addition to the requirements of any other applicable law.
   (B)   Regulations. The wireless regulations and decisions on applications
for placement of wireless facilities in the ROW shall, at a minimum, ensure
that the requirements of this section are satisfied, unless it is determined
that applicant has established that denial of an application would, within the
meaning of federal law, prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of
personal wireless services, or otherwise violate applicable laws or
regulations. If that determination is made, the requirements of this chapter
may be waived, but only to the minimum extent required to avoid the prohibition
or violation.
   (C)   Minimum standards. Wireless facilities shall be installed and modified
in a manner that minimizes risks to public safety, avoids placement of
aboveground facilities in underground areas, avoids installation of new support
structures in the public rights-of-way and otherwise maintains the integrity
and character of the neighborhoods and corridors in which the facilities are
located; ensures that installations are subject to periodic review to minimize
the intrusion on the rights-of-way; and ensures that the city bears no risk or
liability as a result of the installations, and that such use does not
inconvenience the public, interfere with the primary uses of the rights-of-way
or hinder the ability of the city or other government agencies to improve,
modify, relocate, abandon or vacate the public rights-of-way or any portion
thereof or to cause the improvement, modification, relocation, vacation or
abandonment of facilities in the rights-of-way.
   (D)   Design and location standards. All applicants shall design and locate
the wireless facilities in accordance with the Design and Development Standards
for wireless facilities in the public right-of-way set forth and adopted by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council and, from time to time, amended and
updated by the Director.
(Ord. MC-1560, passed 6-16-2021)
§ 12.05.060 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Submission. Unless the wireless regulations provide otherwise, the
applicant shall submit a paper copy and an electronic copy of any application,
amendments or supplements to an application, or responses to requests for
information regarding an application to: Director, at 201 North “E” Street,
Second Floor, San Bernardino, California 92401.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting. Prior to filing an application for a wireless
encroachment permit, an applicant is encouraged to schedule a pre-application
meeting with the Director to discuss the proposed facility, the requirements of
this chapter and any potential impacts of the proposed facility.
   (C)   Content. An applicant shall submit an application on the form approved
by the Director, which may be updated, from time to time, but in any event
shall require the submission of all required fee(s), city business license(s),
documents, information and any other materials necessary to allow the Director
to make required findings and ensure that the proposed facility will comply
with applicable federal and state law, this code and will not endanger the
public health, safety or welfare. If no form has been approved, applications:
      (1)   Must contain all information necessary to show that applicant is
entitled to the wireless encroachment permit requested, including, but not
limited to, the information and documents listed below:
         (a)   Any information required pursuant to the wireless regulations;
         (b)   The name of the applicant, his or her telephone number and
contact information and if the applicant is a wireless infrastructure provider,
the name and contact information for the wireless service provider that will be
using the personal wireless services facility;
         (c)   A complete description of the proposed wireless facility and the
work that will be required to install or modify it, including, but not limited
to, detail regarding proposed excavations, if any; detailed site plans showing
the location of the wireless facility, and specifications for each element of
the wireless facility, clearly describing the site and all structures and
facilities at the site before and after installation or modification; and
describing the distance to the nearest residential dwelling unit and any
historical structure within 500 feet of the facility. Before and after 360-
degree photosimulations must be provided;
         (d)   Documentation sufficient to show that the proposed facility will
comply with generally-applicable health and safety provisions of this code and
the FCC’s radio frequency emissions standards;
         (e)   A copy of the lease or other agreement between the applicant and
the owner of the property to which the proposed facility will be attached;
         (f)   If the application is for a small cell facility, the application
shall state as such and shall explain why the proposed facility meets the
definition of small cell facility in this chapter;
         (g)   If the application is for an eligible facilities request, the
application shall state as such and must contain information sufficient to show
that the application qualifies as an eligible facilities request, which
information must show that there is an existing wireless facility that was
approved by the city. Before and after 360-degree photosimulations must be
provided, as well as documentation sufficient to show that the proposed
facility will comply with generally-applicable health and safety provisions of
this code and the FCC’s radio frequency emissions standards;
         (h)   Proof that notice has been mailed to owners of all property
owners, and the resident manager for any multi-family dwelling unit that
includes ten or more units, within 500 feet of the proposed personal wireless
services facility;
         (i)   If applicant contends that denial of the application would
prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of service in violation of
federal law, or otherwise violate applicable law, the application must provide
all information on which the applicant relies on in support of that claim.
Applicants are not permitted to supplement this showing if doing so would
prevent city from complying with any deadline for action on an application;
         (j)   The electronic version of an application must be in a standard
format that can be easily uploaded on a web page for review by the public; and
         (k)   Any required fees.
      (2)   Must specify whether the applicant believes state or federal law
requires action on the application within a specified time period.
   (D)   Fees. Application fee(s) shall be required to be submitted with any
application for a wireless encroachment permit. The Mayor and City Council are
authorized to determine, or cause to be determined, the amount, type and other
terms of such fee(s), from time to time, by means of resolution.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no application fee shall be refundable, in whole
or in part, to an applicant for a wireless encroachment permit unless paid as a
refundable deposit.
   (E)   Waivers.
      (1)   Requests for waivers from any requirement of this section shall be
made, in writing, to the Director, or his or her designee. The Director may
grant or deny a request for a waiver pursuant to this division (E). The
Director may grant a request for waiver if it is demonstrated that,
notwithstanding the issuance of a waiver, the city will be provided all
information necessary to understand the nature of the construction or other
activity to be conducted pursuant to the permit sought.
      (2)   All waivers approved pursuant to this division (E) shall be:
         (a)   Granted only on a case-by-case basis; and
         (b) Narrowly-tailored to minimize deviation from the requirements of
this code.
   (F)   Incompleteness. For personal wireless facilities and eligible
facilities requests, applications will be processed, and notices of
incompleteness provided, in conformity with state, local and federal law. If
such an application is incomplete, the Director may notify the applicant in
writing, and specify the material omitted from the application.
(Ord. MC-1560, passed 6-16-2021)
§ 12.05.070 FINDINGS; DECISIONS; CONSULTANTS.
   (A)   Findings required for approval.
      (1)   Except for eligible facilities requests, the Director or hearing
officer, as the case may be, shall approve an application if, on the basis of
the application and other materials or evidence provided in review thereof, he
or she finds the following:
         (a)   The facility is not detrimental to the public health, safety and
welfare;
         (b)   The facility complies with this chapter and all applicable
design and development standards; and
         (c)   The facility meets applicable requirements and standards of
state and federal law.
      (2)   For eligible facilities requests, the Director or hearing officer,
as the case may be, shall approve an application if, on the basis of the
application and other materials or evidence provided in review thereof, he or
she finds the following:
         (a)   That the application qualifies as an eligible facilities
request; and
         (b)   That the proposed facility will comply with all generally-
applicable laws.
   (B)   Decisions. Decisions on an application by the Director or hearing
officer shall be in writing and include the reasons for the decision.
   (C)   Independent consultants. The Director or hearing officer, as the case
may be, is authorized, in his or her discretion, to select and retain
independent consultant(s) with expertise in telecommunications in connection
with the review of any application under this chapter. Such independent
consultant review may be retained on any issue that involves specialized or
expert knowledge in connection with an application, including, but not limited
to, application completeness or accuracy, structural engineering analysis or
compliance with FCC radio frequency emissions standards.
(Ord. MC-1560, passed 6-16-2021)
§ 12.05.080 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Generally. In addition to any supplemental conditions imposed by the
Director or hearing officer, as the case may be, all permits granted pursuant
to this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions, unless modified
by the approving authority.
      (1)   Code compliance. The permittee shall, at all times, maintain
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and
other rules, including, without limitation, those applying to use of public
rights-of-way.
      (2)   Permit duration. A wireless encroachment permit shall be valid for
a period of ten years, unless, pursuant to another provision of this code or
these conditions, it expires sooner or is terminated. At the end of ten years
from the date of issuance, such permit shall automatically expire, unless an
extension or renewal has been granted. A person holding a wireless encroachment
permit must either:
         (a)   Remove the facility within 30 days following the permit’s
expiration (provided that removal of support structure owned by the city, a
utility or another entity authorized to maintain a support structure in the
right-of-way need not be removed, but must be restored to its prior condition,
except as specifically permitted by the city); or
         (b)   At least 90 days prior to expiration, submit an application to
renew the permit, which application must, among all other requirements,
demonstrate that the impact of the wireless facility cannot be reduced. The
wireless facility must remain in place until it is acted upon by the city and
all appeals from the city’s decision exhausted.
      (3)   Timing of installation. The installation and construction
authorized by a wireless encroachment permit shall begin within six months
after its approval, or it will expire without further action by the city. The
installation and construction authorized by a wireless encroachment permit
shall conclude, including any necessary post-installation repairs and/or
restoration to the ROW, within 30 days following the day construction
commenced.
      (4)   Commencement of operations. The operation of the approved facility
shall commence no later than one month after the completion of installation, or
the wireless encroachment permit will expire without further action by the
city.
      (5)   As-built drawings. The permittee shall submit an as-built drawing
within 90 days after installation of the facility. As-builts shall be in an
electronic format acceptable to the city.
      (6)   Inspections; emergencies. The city, or its designee, may enter onto
the facility area to inspect the facility upon 48 hours’ prior notice to the
permittee. The permittee shall cooperate with all inspections and may be
present for any inspection of its facility by the city. The city reserves the
right to enter, or direct its designee to enter, the facility and support,
repair, disable or remove any elements of the facility in emergencies or when
the facility threatens imminent harm to persons or property. The city shall
make an effort to contact the permittee prior to disabling or removing any
facility elements, but in any case shall notify permittee within 24 hours of
doing so.
      (7)   Contact. The permittee shall, at all times, maintain accurate
contact information for all parties responsible for the facility, which shall
include a 24-hour emergency phone number, street mailing address and e-mail
address for at least one natural person.
      (8)   Insurance. Permittee shall obtain and maintain throughout the term
of the permit commercial general liability insurance with a limit of $2,000,000
per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage and $4,000,000 general
aggregate, including premises operations, contractual liability, personal
injury and products completed operations. The relevant policy(ies) shall name
the city, its elected/appointed officials, commission members, officers,
representatives, agents and employees as additional insureds. Permittee shall
use its best efforts to provide [30 days’] prior notice to the city of to the
cancellation or material modification of any applicable insurance policy.
      (9)   Indemnities.
         (a)   The permittee and, if applicable, the owner of the property upon
which the wireless facility is installed shall defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the city, its agents, officers, officials and employees:
            1.   From any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs
and expenses, and from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, writs of mandamus
and other actions or proceedings brought against the city or its agents,
officers, officials or employees to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set
aside, void or annul the city’s approval of the permit; and
            2.   From any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs
and expenses, and any and all claims, demands, lawsuits or causes of action and
other actions or proceedings of any kind or form, whether for personal injury,
death or property damage, arising out of or in connection with the activities
or performance of the permittee or, if applicable, the property owner or any of
each one’s agents, employees, licensees, contractors, subcontractors or
independent contractors.
         (b)   In the event the city becomes aware of any such actions or
claims, the city shall promptly notify the permittee and, if applicable, the
property owner and shall reasonably cooperate in the defense. The city shall
have the right to approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld,
the legal counsel providing the city’s defense and the property owner and/or
permittee (as applicable) shall reimburse city for any costs and expenses
directly and necessarily incurred by the city in the course of the defense.
      (10)   Adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Permittee shall undertake
all reasonable efforts to avoid undue adverse impacts to adjacent properties
and/or uses that may arise from the construction, operation, maintenance,
modification and removal of the facility.
      (11)   Non-interference. Permittee shall not move, alter, temporarily
relocate, change or interfere with any existing structure, improvement or
property without the prior consent of the owner of that structure, city
improvement or property. No structure, improvement or property owned by the
city shall be moved to accommodate a permitted activity or encroachment, unless
the city determines that such movement will not adversely affect the city or
any surrounding businesses or residents, and the permittee pays all costs and
expenses related to the relocation of the city’s structure, improvement or
property. Prior to commencement of any work pursuant to a wireless encroachment
permit, the permittee shall provide the city with documentation establishing to
the city’s satisfaction that the permittee has the legal right to use or
interfere with any other structure, improvement or property within the public
right-of-way or city utility easement to be affected by permittee’s facilities.
      (12)   No right, title or interest. The permission granted by a wireless
encroachment permit shall not in any event constitute an easement on or an
encumbrance against the public right-of-way. No right, title or interest
(including franchise interest) in the public right-of-way, or any part thereof,
shall vest or accrue in permittee by reason of a wireless encroachment permit
or the issuance of any other permit or exercise of any privilege given thereby.
      (13)   No possessory interest. No possessory interest is created by a
wireless encroachment permit. However, to the extent that a possessory interest
is deemed created by a governmental entity with taxation authority, the
permittee acknowledges that the city has given, to the permittee, notice,
pursuant to Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, § 107.6, that the use or occupancy
of any public property, pursuant to a wireless encroachment permit, may create
a possessory interest which may be subject to the payment of property taxes
levied upon such interest. Permittee shall be solely liable for, and shall pay
and discharge prior to delinquency, any and all possessory interact taxes or
other taxes, fees and assessments levied against permittee’s right to
possession, occupancy or use of any public property pursuant to any right of
possession, occupancy or use created by this permit.
      (14)   General maintenance. The site and the facility, including, but not
limited to, all landscaping, fencing and related transmission equipment, must
be maintained in a neat and clean manner and in accordance with all approved
plans. All graffiti on facilities must be removed at the sole expense of the
permittee within 48 hours after notification from the city.
      (15)   RF exposure compliance. All facilities must comply with all
standards and regulations of the FCC and any other state or federal government
agency with the authority to regulate RF exposure standards. After transmitter
and antenna system optimization, but prior to unattended operations of the
facility, permittee or its representative must conduct on-site post
installation RF emissions testing to demonstrate actual compliance with the FCC
OET Bulletin 65 RF emissions safety rules for general population/uncontrolled
RF exposure in all sectors. For this testing, the transmitter shall be
operating at maximum operating power, and the testing shall occur outwards to a
distance where the RF emissions no longer exceed the uncontrolled/general
population limit.
      (16)   Testing. Testing of any equipment shall take place on weekdays
only, and only between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., except that
testing is prohibited on holidays that fall on a weekday. In addition, testing
is prohibited on weekend days.
      (17)   Modifications. No changes shall be made to the approved plans
without review and approval in accordance with this chapter.
      (18)   Agreement with city. If not already completed, permittee shall
enter into the appropriate agreement with the city, as determined by the city,
prior to constructing, attaching or operating a facility on municipal
infrastructure. This permit is not a substitute for such agreement.
      (19)   Conflicts with improvements. For all facilities located within the
ROW, the permittee shall remove or relocate, at its expense and without expense
to the city, any or all of its facilities when such removal or relocation is
deemed necessary by the city by reason of any change of grade, alignment or
width of any right-of-way, for installation of services, water pipes, drains,
storm drains, power or signal lines, traffic-control devices, right-of-way
improvements or for any other construction, repair or improvement to the right-
of-way.
      (20)   Abandonment.
         (a)   If a facility is not operated for a continuous period of six
months, the wireless encroachment permit and any other permit or approval
therefor shall be deemed abandoned and terminated automatically, unless before
the end of the six-month period:
            1.   The Director has determined that the facility has resumed
operations; or
            2.   The city has received an application to transfer the permit to
another service provider.
         (b)   No later than 90 days from the date the facility is determined
to have ceased operation or the permittee has notified the Director of its
intent to vacate the site, the permittee shall remove all equipment and
improvements associated with the use and shall restore the site to its original
condition to the satisfaction of the Director. The permittee shall provide
written verification of the removal of the facilities within 30 days of the
date the removal is completed. If the facility is not removed within 30 days
after the permit has been discontinued pursuant to this division (A)(20), the
site shall be deemed to be a nuisance, and the city may cause the facility to
be removed at permittee’s expense or by calling any bond or other financial
assurance to pay for removal. If there are two or more users of a single
facility or support structure, then this provision shall apply to the specific
elements or parts thereof that were abandoned, but will not be effective for
the entirety thereof until all users cease use thereof.
      (21)   Encourage co-location. Where the facility site is capable of
accommodating a co-located facility upon the same site in a manner consistent
with the permit conditions for the existing facility, the owner and operator of
the existing facility shall allow co-location of third party facilities;
provided the parties can mutually agree upon reasonable terms and conditions.
      (22)   Records. The permittee must maintain complete and accurate copies
of all permits and other regulatory approvals issued in connection with the
facility, which includes, without limitation, this approval, the approved plans
and photo simulations incorporated into this approval, all conditions
associated with this approval and any ministerial permits or approvals issued
in connection with this approval. In the event that the permittee does not
maintain such records as required in this condition or fails to produce true
and complete copies of such records within a reasonable time after a written
request from the city, any ambiguities or uncertainties that would be resolved
through an inspection of the missing records will be construed against the
permittee.
      (23)   Attorneys’ fees. In the event the city determines that it is
necessary to take legal action to enforce any of these conditions, or to revoke
a permit, and such legal action is taken, the permittee shall be required to
pay any and all costs of such legal action, including reasonable attorneys’
fees, incurred by the city, even if the matter is not prosecuted to a final
judgment or is amicably resolved, unless the city should otherwise agree with
permittee to waive said fees or any part thereof. The foregoing shall not apply
if the permittee prevails in the enforcement proceeding.
   (B)   Eligible facilities requests. In addition to the conditions provided
in Section 9(a) of this Chapter and any supplemental conditions imposed by the
Director or hearing officer, as the case may be, all permits for an eligible
facility requests granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
following additional conditions, unless modified by the approving authority.
      (1)   Permit subject to conditions of underlying permit. Any permit
granted in response to an application qualifying as an eligible facilities
request shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the underlying permit.
      (2)   No permit term extension. The city’s grant or grant by operation of
law of an eligible facilities request permit constitutes a federally-mandated
modification to the underlying permit or approval for the subject tower or base
station. Notwithstanding any permit duration established in another permit
condition, the city’s grant or grant by operation of law of a eligible
facilities request permit will not extend the permit term for the underlying
permit or any other underlying regulatory approval, and its term shall be
coterminous with the underlying permit or other regulatory approval for the
subject tower, utility pole or base station.
      (3)   No waiver of standing. The city’s grant or grant by operation of
law of an eligible facilities request does not waive, and shall not be
construed to waive, any standing by the city to challenge § 6409(a) of the
Spectrum Act, any FCC rules that interpret § 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act or any
modification to § 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act.
   (C)   Small cell facilities requests. In addition to the conditions provided
in Section 9(a) of this Chapter and any supplemental conditions imposed by the
Director or hearing officer, as the case may be, all permits for a small cell
facility granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the following
condition, unless modified by the approving authority: the city’s grant of a
permit for a small cell facility request does not waive, and shall not be
construed to waive, any standing by the city to challenge any FCC orders or
rules related to small cell facilities, or any modification to those FCC orders
or rules.
(Ord. MC-1560, passed 6-16-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Spectrum Act of 2012, § 6409(a), see 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a)
§ 12.05.090 BREACH; TERMINATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   For breach. A wireless encroachment permit may be revoked for failure
to comply with the conditions of the permit or applicable law. Upon revocation,
the wireless facility must be removed; provided that removal of a support
structure owned by city, a utility or another entity authorized to maintain a
support structure in the right-of-way need not be removed, but must be restored
to its prior condition, except as specifically permitted by the city. All costs
incurred by the city in connection with the revocation and removal shall be
paid by entities who own or control any part of the wireless facility.
   (B)   For installation without a permit. A wireless facility installed
without a wireless encroachment permit (except for those exempted by this
chapter) must be removed; provided that removal of support structure owned by
the city, a utility or another entity authorized to maintain a support
structure in the right of way need not be removed, but must be restored to its
prior condition, except as specifically permitted by the city. All costs
incurred by the city in connection with the revocation and removal shall be
paid by entities who own or control any part of the wireless facility.
   (C)   Municipal infraction. Any violation of this chapter will be subject to
the same penalties as a violation of
Chapter 1.12.
(Ord. MC-1560, passed 6-16-2021)
§ 12.05.100 INFRASTRUCTURE CONTROLLED BY CITY.
   The city, as a matter of policy, will negotiate agreements for use of
municipal infrastructure. The placement of wireless facilities on those
structures shall be subject to the agreement. The agreement shall specify the
compensation to the city for use of the structures. The person seeking the
agreement shall additionally reimburse the city for all costs the city incurs
in connection with its review of, and action upon the person’s request for, an
agreement.
§ 12.05.110 NON-DISCRIMINATION.
   In establishing the rights, obligations and conditions set forth in this
chapter, it is the intent of the city to treat each applicant or public right-
of-way user in a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory manner, to the
extent required by law, and with considerations that may be unique to the
technologies, situation and legal status of each particular applicant or
request for use of the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. MC-1560, passed 6-16-2021)
CHAPTER 12.08: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1004, passed 10-21-1997)
CHAPTER 12.12: TELEGRAPH AND TELEPHONE POLES - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Section
   
12.12.010   Removal from streets and placement underground required
   
12.12.020   Use of insulated conduits required
   
12.12.030   Applicable districts
   
12.12.040   Erection of poles - no permits issued
   
12.12.050   Violation - penalty
Cross-reference:
   For provisions on underground utilities, see
Chapter 13.36
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on conversion of utilities facilities to underground
locations, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, §§ 5896.1 et seq. and Cal. Gov’t
Code, § 38793
§ 12.12.010 REMOVAL FROM STREETS AND PLACEMENT UNDERGROUND REQUIRED.
   All poles heretofore erected for telephone, telegraph or other wires (except
electric light, power and trolley wires), or for carrying or conducting wires
for the purpose of conducting or transmitting telephonic or telegraphic
messages, sounds or signals by electricity, within the district described in §
12.12.030, shall, on or before June 1, 1907, be removed from the public streets
of the city, within the district described, and the keeping or maintaining
thereafter in the public streets within said district of any pole or poles for
telephone, telegraph or other purpose (except for electric light, power or
trolley wire), or any wire or wires upon or above the surface of the ground,
for the purpose of conducting, carrying or transmitting telephonic or
telegraphic sounds, messages or signals, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 335, passed 10-10-1906)
§ 12.12.020 USE OF INSULATED CONDUITS REQUIRED.
   All telephone, telegraph or other wires used for the purpose of conducting,
carrying or transmitting telephonic or telegraphic messages, sounds or signals,
along or over the public streets of the city within that portion of the city
described in § 1.12.030 shall, on or before June 1, 1907, be removed and placed
underground in properly insulated conduits constructed and built under the
supervision of the Director of Development Services of the city, and to the
satisfaction of the Mayor and City Council.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7bb690b80ee5b92444942f82544ba748383751e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5974.png]
 
(Ord. 335, passed 10-10-1906; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1027,
passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.12.030 APPLICABLE DISTRICTS.
   The portion or district of the city, which is affected by the provisions of
this chapter and referred to in §§
12.12.010 and
12.12.020, is particularly described as follows: commencing at the southeast
corner of Lot Seven of Block 14 of the city; thence north along the east line
of said Block 14 and along the east line of Block 19 to the northeast corner of
said Block 19; thence west along the north lines of said Block 19, 20 and 21 to
a point 50 feet west of the northeast corner of Lot Seven of said Block 21;
thence south to a point 50 feet west of the northeast corner of Lot Two of said
Block 21; thence west to the northwest corner of said Lot Four of said Block
21; thence south along the west line of said Lot Four to a point midway between
the north and south lines of said Lot Four; thence west across “F” Street and
along the north lines of Lots One and Two of Block 22 to the northwest corner
of Lot Two of said Block 22; thence south to a point in the west line of Lot
Five of Block 11 midway between the north and south lines of said Lot Five;
thence east to the southwest corner of Lot Five of Block 12; thence south to
the southwest corner of Lot Four of said Block 12; thence east to the point of
beginning, all according to the official map of said city of record in the
office of the County Recorder in Book 7 of Maps, Page 1.
(Ord. 335, passed 10-10-1906)
§ 12.12.040 ERECTION OF POLES - NO PERMITS ISSUED.
   The Director of Development Services of the city is directed to issue no
permits for the erection of poles for telephone or telegraph wires within the
district described in §
12.12.030 and to prevent the erection within said district of any more poles to
be used for carrying or supporting of wire for the conducting or transmitting
of electric messages, sounds or signals.
(Ord. 335, passed 10-10-1906; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1027,
passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.12.050 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter,
or fails to comply with the conditions of this chapter, is guilty of a
misdemeanor, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 335, passed 10-10-1906; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 12.16: DATUM PLANE
Section
   
12.16.010   Established
   
12.16.020   Addition to official grades
§ 12.16.010 ESTABLISHED.
   The official datum for all leveling for the city is established as the sea
level datum of 1929.
(Ord. 2040, passed 8-3-1954)
§ 12.16.020 ADDITION TO OFFICIAL GRADES.
   There shall be added to all official grades established prior to August 2,
1954, by the City Engineer and adopted by the Mayor and City Council, seventy-
hundredths feet, which vertical distance shall be considered as the adjustment
between the official datum plane established by Ord. 3832, and the sea level
datum of 1929.
(Ord. 2040, passed 8-3-1954)
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 383 was repealed by Ord. 2040, passed 8-3-1954.
CHAPTER 12.20: PUBLIC PROJECTS
Section
   
12.20.010   Adoption of state statutes
   
12.20.020   Applicable definitions
   
12.20.030   Bids; expenditure requiring; notice
§ 12.20.010 ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES.
   Cal. Public Contract Code, §§ 20161, 20163, 20164, 20166 and 20168 are
adopted as laws governing the city, and such sections shall take effect and be
in force within the city except as set forth in this chapter; provided that any
public project shall be exempted under this chapter if the Mayor and City
Council or the Board of Water Commissioners determine that the work on such
public project can be performed by day labor or city forces.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3275, passed 7-14-1972; Ord. MC-484, passed
11-20-1985)
§ 12.20.020 APPLICABLE DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   As used in Cal. Public Contract Code, § 20161, the phrase PUBLIC
PROJECT shall not mean the repair or maintenance of public projects.
   (B)   The phrase REPAIR OR MAINTENANCE, as used in this chapter, is defined
to mean only those items constituting rehabilitation to original condition, or,
as applied to streets:
      (1)   The reworking of the existing street surface by the application of
one and one-half inch or less overlay, except that 25% of the project may be of
a greater thickness to provide a leveling course; and
      (2)   The repair or replacement of existing signs, signals, safety
devices, guard rails, seal coats, culverts, curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
driveways and similar items.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3224, passed 1-4-1972; Ord. MC-484, passed 11-
20-1985)
§ 12.20.030 BIDS; EXPENDITURE REQUIRING; NOTICE.
   When the expenditure required for a public project exceeds $5,000, it shall
be contracted for and let to the lowest responsible bidder after notice.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. MC-484, passed 11-20-1985)
CHAPTER 12.21: DESIGN-BUILD
Section
   
12.21.010   Purpose and intent
   
12.21.020   Definitions
   
12.21.030   Design-build procurement authorized
   
12.21.040   Procurement process
   
12.21.050   Bonds and insurance
   
12.21.060   Subcontractors
   
12.21.070   Other rights and remedies
§ 12.21.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide definitions and guidelines for the
award, use and evaluation of design-build contracts.
(Ord. MC-1423, passed 7-5-2016)
§ 12.21.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST VALUE. A value determined by evaluation of objective criteria that may
include, but not be limited to, price, features, functions, life-cycle costs,
experience and past performance. A BEST VALUE determination may involve the
selection of the lowest cost proposal meeting the interests of the city and
meeting the objectives of the project, selection of the best proposal for a
stipulated sum established by the city or a tradeoff between price and other
specified factors.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino.
   CONSTRUCTION SUBCONTRACT. Each subcontract awarded by the design-build
entity to a subcontractor that will perform work or labor or render service to
the design-build entity in or about the construction of the work or
improvement, or a subcontractor licensed by the State of California that, under
subcontract to the design-build entity, specially fabricates and installs a
portion of the work or improvement according to detailed drawings contained in
the plans and specifications produced by the design-build team.
   DESIGN-BUILD. A project delivery process in which both the design and
construction of a project are procured from a single entity.
   DESIGN-BUILD ENTITY. A corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
joint venture or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately
licensed contracting, architectural and engineering services as needed pursuant
to a design-build contract.
   DESIGN-BUILD TEAM. The design-build entity itself and the individuals and
other entities identified by the design-build entity as members of its team.
Members shall include the general contractor and, if utilized in the design of
the project, all electrical, mechanical and plumbing contractors.
   PROCUREMENT AGENT. The City Manager, the General Manager of the City
Municipal Water Department or the designee of either the City Manager or
General Manager.
   PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT. Any city project requiring design and construction
services.
(Ord. MC-1423, passed 7-5-2016)
§ 12.21.030 DESIGN-BUILD PROCUREMENT AUTHORIZED.
   Pursuant to the City Charter, and notwithstanding any provision to the
contrary in the California Public Contracts Code or in any other ordinance or
procedure of the city, the use of design-build procurement is authorized for
any public works project, including, but not limited to, any public works
project undertaken by the City Municipal Water Department, no matter the
amount. The city, with approval of the Mayor and City Council, or for public
works projects undertaken by City Municipal Water Department, the approval of
the Board of Water Commissioners may award a public works project contract to
the low bid or the best value. Any code, ordinance or procedure in conflict
with the foregoing authorization is specifically superseded.
(Ord. MC-1423, passed 7-5-2016)
§ 12.21.040 PROCUREMENT PROCESS.
   (A)   The procurement agent shall prepare a set of documents setting forth
the scope and estimated price of the public works project. The documents may
include, but need not be limited to, the size, type and desired design
character of the public works project; performance specifications covering the
quality of materials, equipment, workmanship, preliminary plans or building
layouts; or any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the
city’s needs. The performance specifications and any plans shall be prepared by
a design professional who is duly licensed and registered in the state.
   (B)   (1)   The procurement agent shall prepare and issue a request for
qualifications in order to pre-qualify or short-list the design-build entities
whose proposals shall be evaluated for final selection.
      (2)   The request for qualifications shall include, but need not be
limited to, the following elements:
         (a)   Identification of the basic scope and needs of the public works
project or contract, the expected cost range, the methodology that will be used
by the city to evaluate proposals, the procedure for final selection of the
design-build entity and any other information deemed necessary by the city to
inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity;
         (b)   Significant factors that the city reasonably expects to consider
in evaluating qualifications, including technical design and construction
expertise, acceptable safety record and all other non-price-related factors;
         (c)   1.   A standard template request for statements of
qualifications prepared by the city. In preparing the standard template, the
city may consult with the construction industry, the building trades and surety
industry and other cities using design-build procurement.
            2.   The template shall require the following information:
               a.   If the design-build entity is a privately held corporation,
limited liability company, partnership or joint venture, a listing of all of
the shareholders, partners or members known at the time of statement of
qualification submission who will perform work on the public works project;
               b.   Evidence that the members of the design-build team have
completed, or demonstrated the experience, competency, capability and capacity
to complete projects of similar size, scope or complexity, and that proposed
key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and
complete the design and construction of the public works project, and a
financial statement that ensures that the design-build entity has the capacity
to complete the public works project;
               c.   The licenses, registration and credentials required to
design and construct the public works project, including, but not limited to,
information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential or
registration;
               d.   Evidence that establishes that the design-build entity has
the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability
insurance and errors and omissions insurance;
               e.   Information concerning workers’ compensation experience
history and a worker safety program;
               f.   If the proposed design-build entity is a corporation,
limited liability company, partnership, joint venture or other legal entity, a
copy of the organizational documents or agreement committing to form the
organization; and
               g.   An acceptable safety record. A proposer’s safety record
shall be deemed acceptable if its experience modification rate for the most
recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and its average total
recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most
recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical standards
for its business category or if the proposer is a party to an alternative
dispute resolution system as provided for in the Cal. Labor Code, § 3201.5.
         (d)   1.   The information required under this section shall be
certified under penalty of perjury by the design-build entity and its general
partners or joint venture members.
            2.   Information required under this section that is not otherwise
a public record under the California Public Records Act (Cal. Gov’t Code, Title
1, Division 10, Part 2, Chapter 1, commencing with § 7921.000) shall not be
open to public inspection.
   (C)   (1)   Based on the documents prepared as described in division (A)
above, the procurement agent shall prepare a request for proposals that invites
pre-qualified or short-listed entities to submit competitive sealed proposals
in the manner prescribed by the city.
      (2)   The request for proposals shall include, but need not be limited
to, the following elements:
         (a)   Identification of the basic scope and needs of the public works
project or contract, the estimated cost of the public works project, the
methodology that will be used by the city to evaluate proposals, whether the
contract will be awarded on the basis of low bid or best value and any other
information deemed necessary by the city to inform interested parties of the
contracting opportunity;
         (b)   Significant factors that the city reasonably expects to consider
in evaluating proposals, including, but not limited to, cost or price and all
non-price-related factors;
         (c)   The relative importance or the weight assigned to each of the
factors identified in the request for proposals; and
         (d)   Where a best value selection method is used, the city may
reserve the right to request proposal revisions and hold discussions and
negotiations with responsive proposers, in which case the city shall so specify
in the request for proposals and shall publish separately or incorporate into
the request for proposals applicable procedures to be observed by the city to
ensure that any discussions or negotiations are conducted in good faith.
   (D)   For those public works projects utilizing low bid as the final
selection method, the competitive bidding process shall result in lump-sum bids
by the pre-qualified or short-listed design-build entities, and awards shall be
made by the Mayor and City Council or, for public works projects undertaken by
the City Municipal Water Department, the Board of Water Commissioners, to the
design-build entity that is the lowest responsible bidder.
   (E)   For those public works projects utilizing best value as a selection
method, the design-build competition shall progress as follows.
      (1)   Competitive proposals shall be evaluated by using only the criteria
and selection procedures specifically identified in the request for proposals.
The following minimum factors, however, shall be weighted as deemed appropriate
by the procurement agent:
         (a)   Price, unless a stipulated sum is specified;
         (b)   Technical design and construction expertise; and
         (c)   Life-cycle costs over 15 or more years.
      (2)   Pursuant to division (C) above, the city may hold discussions or
negotiations with responsive proposers using the process articulated in the
city’s request for proposals.
      (3)   When the evaluation is complete, the responsive proposers shall be
ranked based on a determination of value provided; provided that no more than
three proposers are required to be ranked.
      (4)   The award of the contract shall be made to the responsible design-
build entity whose proposal is determined by the Mayor and City Council, or for
public works projects undertaken by the City Municipal Water Department, the
Board of Water Commissioners, to have offered the best value to the public.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, upon issuance of
a contract award, the city shall publicly announce its award, identifying the
design-build entity to which the award is made, along with a statement
regarding the basis of the award.
      (6)   The statement regarding the city’s contract award, described in
division (E)(5) above, and the contract file shall provide sufficient
information to satisfy an external audit.
(Ord. MC-1423, passed 7-5-2016)
Editor’s note:
   Financial information submitted for bids is discloseable, except that some
corporate financial information may be protected under Cal. Gov’t Code, §§
7927.500, 7928.705, 7927.705, 7927.605 and 7922.000 (formerly Cal. Gov’t Code,
§§ 6254(a), (h) and (k); 6254.15; and 6255).
§ 12.21.050 BONDS AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   The design-build entity shall provide payment and performance bonds
for the public works project in the form and in the amount required by the
city, and issued by a state admitted surety. The amount of the payment bond
shall not be less than the amount of the performance bond.
   (B)   The design-build contract shall require errors and omissions insurance
coverage for the design elements of the public works project.
   (C)   The procurement agent shall develop a standard form of payment and
performance bond for its design-build public works projects.
(Ord. MC-1423, passed 7-5-2016)
§ 12.21.060 SUBCONTRACTORS.
   (A)   The procurement agent, in each design-build request for proposals, may
identify specific types of subcontractors that must be included in the design-
build entity statement of qualifications and proposal.
   (B)   Following award of the design-build contract, the design-build entity
shall proceed as follows in awarding construction subcontracts with a value
exceeding 0.5% of the contract price allocable to construction work:
      (1)   Provide public notice of availability of work to be subcontracted
in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive
bidding process of the city, including a fixed date and time on which
qualifications statements, bids or proposals will be due;
      (2)   Establish reasonable qualification criteria and standards; and
      (3)   Award the subcontract either on a best value basis or to the lowest
responsible bidder. The process may include pre-qualification or short-listing.
The foregoing process does not apply to construction subcontractors listed in
the original proposal.
(Ord. MC-1423, passed 7-5-2016)
§ 12.21.070 OTHER RIGHTS AND REMEDIES.
   Nothing in this chapter affects, expands, alters or limits any rights or
remedies otherwise available at law, including, but not limited to, the ability
of the Mayor and City Council, or for public works projects undertaken by the
City Municipal Water Department, the Board of Water Commissioners, to reject
all bids pursuant to the authority granted by the City Charter.
(Ord. MC-1423, passed 7-5-2016)
CHAPTER 12.24: PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
Section
   
12.24.010   Bond required
   
12.24.020   Compliance with state statute
   
12.24.030   Prevailing wages
§ 12.24.010 BOND REQUIRED.
   Each contractor shall execute and file with the city a good and sufficient
surety company bond for labor and materials in the sum of not less than one-
half of the total amount payable by the terms of the contract for any public
works; provided that the amount exceeds $2,000 at the time of execution of the
contract.
(Ord. 2386, passed 9-5-1961)
§ 12.24.020 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE STATUTE.
   The provisions of such bond as required in §
12.24.010 shall be in accordance with the provisions of the general law set
forth in the Cal. Gov’t Code, Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 10.5, as now in
effect and as hereafter amended unless otherwise provided by ordinance.
(Ord. 2386, passed 9-5-1961)
§ 12.24.030 PREVAILING WAGES.
   Under and pursuant to the Cal. Labor Code, § 1770, the Director of
Industrial Relations determines the general prevailing rate of per diem wages
in the city for each craft or type of worker or mechanic. Such rates shall be
applicable to any public works contract, as such term is defined under the Cal.
Labor Code, §§ 1720 et seq., of the city.
(Ord. MC-1425, passed 7-18-2016)
CHAPTER 12.28: IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
12.28.010   Procedure authorized
   
12.28.020   Public hearing
   
12.28.030   Combined hearing authorized
   
12.28.040   Combined notices authorized
   
12.28.050   Hearing - decisions - effect
   
12.28.060   Permit required
   
12.28.070   Written application required
   
12.28.080   Fees required
   
12.28.090   Plan fees
   
12.28.100   Regulations
   
12.28.110   Violation of sections 12.28.060 through 12.28.100 - penalty
Statutory reference:
   For the Improvement Act of 1911, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, §§ 5000
et seq.
§ 12.28.010 PROCEDURE AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Before the Mayor and City Council adopt any resolution or ordinance
ordering the construction of any improvement or the acquisition of any property
for public use, or both, herein referred to as “improvement,” where the cost
thereof is to be paid in whole or in part by special assessment taxes upon
lands, a public hearing may be held and a finding and determination made by the
Mayor and City Council as provided herein that the public convenience and
necessity require the same.
   (B)   If such procedure is not so followed and if such finding and
determination is not made pursuant thereto, the requirements otherwise
prescribed by Cal. Streets and Highways Code, Division 4, and Article XIII, §
24 of the California Constitution shall be complied with before any such
resolution or ordinance may be adopted.
(Ord. 2063, passed 5-17-1955)
§ 12.28.020 PUBLIC HEARING.
   The Mayor and City Council may hold a public hearing to find and determine
whether the public convenience and necessity require any such improvement.
Reference may be made to one or more plans, profiles, specifications, maps or
plats for the description of the improvement and all particulars relative
thereto, which plans, profiles, specifications, maps or plats shall be on file
with the City Clerk or the City Engineer and open to inspection.
(Ord. 2063, passed 5-17-1955)
§ 12.28.030 COMBINED HEARING AUTHORIZED.
   The hearing required by this chapter may be a separate hearing or may be
combined and held concurrently with the hearing required by the Improvement
Act, pursuant to which the improvement proceeding is proposed.
(Ord. 2063, passed 5-17-1955)
Statutory reference:
   Improvement Act of 1911, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, §§ 5000 et seq.
§ 12.28.040 COMBINED NOTICES AUTHORIZED.
   Whether the hearing is held separate, or combined and held concurrently with
the hearing required by the Improvement Act, pursuant to which the improvement
proceeding is proposed, notice shall be given by posting and publication in the
manner prescribed by the Improvement Act involved, and if the hearings are
combined or held concurrently, such notice may be combined with the notice of
hearing given under the Improvement Act under which the improvement proceeding
is proposed.
(Ord. 2063, passed 5-17-1955)
§ 12.28.050 HEARING - DECISIONS - EFFECT.
   (A)   The hearing may be continued from time to time. After the conclusion
thereof and prior to adoption of a resolution or ordinance ordering the
improvement, the Mayor and City Council shall consider and pass upon all
protests filed and all matters presented, and their decision thereon shall be
final and conclusive.
   (B)   If, by such decision, the Mayor and City Council find and determine by
no less than a four-fifths vote of all members thereof that the public
convenience and necessity require such improvement, the Mayor and City Council
may thereafter, in accordance with the Improvement Act specified or designated
for the project, adopt a resolution or ordinance ordering the improvement
substantially as proposed, or as modified, altered or changed by order of the
Mayor and City Council as authorized by the improvement act for the project.
   (C)   After such finding and determination by the Mayor and City Council,
the provisions of law for debt limitation and majority protest, as mentioned in
Article XIII, § 24 of the California Constitution, shall not apply.
(Ord. 2063, passed 5-17-1955)
§ 12.28.060 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to grade, prepare,
subgrade, pave, lay sewer or drain pipe, construct curbs, gutters, driveways,
sidewalks, manholes, catch basins, retaining walls, traffic signals, street
lighting systems or similar structures in any street, alley or way, which
street, alley or way is dedicated or proposed to be dedicated for public use,
within the city, without first obtaining a written permit from the city to do
so. No such permit shall be issued for use of quarry tile or ceramic tile for
such improvements, but permission may be granted for use of patterned concrete
in such sidewalks, street medians and parkways. The Director of Development
Services may establish a standard color for patterned concrete to be placed in
sidewalks, street medians and parkways on public developments, but the
developer shall have the right to choose the color if the improvements are
being made by a private developer.
(Ord. 1963, passed 11-18-1952; Ord. 2519, passed 8-20-1963; Ord. 3918, passed
2-25-1980; Ord. MC-320, passed 12-6-1983; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord.
MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.28.070 WRITTEN APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring a permit under this chapter shall
present a written application therefor to the City Engineer, setting forth the
name and address of the applicant; details concerning the location, nature and
extent of construction intended to be made; and the purpose for which the
construction is to be made and used.
(Ord. 1963, passed 11-18-1952)
§ 12.28.080 FEES REQUIRED.
   For construction, repair and alteration of sidewalks, curbs, gutters,
driveways, subgrades and pavements, manholes, catch basins, retaining walls,
traffic signals, street lighting systems and other structures, and for
excavating, laying and backfilling sewers and drainage pipe lines, concerning
which specifications, lines and grades therefor shall be determined by the City
Engineer, charges for inspections and construction staking shall be based upon
a schedule of fees fixed by resolution duly adopted by the Mayor and City
Council after the conclusion of a public hearing relating thereto.
(Ord. 1963, passed 11-18-1952; Ord. 3432, passed 6-17-1974; Ord. 3918, passed
2-25-1980)
§ 12.28.090 PLAN FEES.
   Charges shall be made by the City Engineer and paid by the applicant for
checking improvement plans relating to street projects, except as otherwise
provided in Title 18, based upon a schedule of fees fixed by resolution duly
adopted by the Mayor and City Council after the conclusion of a public hearing
relating thereto.
(Ord. 1963, passed 11-18-1952; Ord. 3432, passed 6-17-1974)
§ 12.28.100 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation performing work
under this chapter to fail, neglect or refuse to remove all unused materials
and debris within three days after completion of the work.
   (B)   The materials used in the construction work may be stored on adjacent
public property during the course of construction; provided that the same are
so placed and safeguarded by lights, warning signs and barricades, as not to
constitute a hazard to public peace and safety.
   (C)   No driveway approach shall cross over a lot line as extended without
the consent of the City Engineer.
   (D)   Raw materials and workmanship for work provided under this chapter
shall conform to applicable provisions of standard specifications on file in
the office of the City Engineer.
   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation doing work under this chapter shall
cause all such work to be inspected by the City Engineer’s office, and shall
notify said Department 24 hours before the time set for inspection. Work
completed without such notice or request for inspection will not be accepted,
and work done during the absence of said inspector may not be accepted by the
city. All work to be performed under this chapter shall be to the satisfaction
of the city and in accordance with laws of the city and state and under the
supervision of the City Engineer, or his or her authorized inspector.
(Ord. 1963, passed 11-18-1952; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 12.28.110 VIOLATION OF SECTIONS 12.28.060 THROUGH 12.28.100 - PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil penalties. Any person, firm or corporation doing work for which
a permit is required under this chapter, without having first obtained such
permit, shall be required to pay fees for all such work in an amount twice the
amount fixed by resolution for such work.
   (B)   Criminal penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of §§
12.28.060 through
12.28.100 is guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is
punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 1963, passed 11-18-1952; Ord. 3774, passed 11-9-1978; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 12.30: SIGHT DISTANCE REQUIREMENT
Section
   
12.30.010   Definitions
   
12.30.020   Provision of sight distance
   
12.30.030   Obstructions
   
12.30.040   Existing obstructions
   
12.30.050   Street trees
   
12.30.060   Violation - penalty
§ 12.30.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES. Any authorized representative of said
Director.
   SIGHT RESTRICTION. Any obstruction to a driver’s line of sight.
   SIGHT TRIANGLE. The area in which no sight restrictions are allowed.
   TRAFFIC ENGINEER. Any authorized representative of the City’s Traffic
Engineer.
(Ord. MC-783, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.30.020 PROVISION OF SIGHT DISTANCE.
   Sufficient sight distance shall be provided at all intersections to allow
approaching vehicles to stop before colliding with a vehicle on an intersecting
street. No obstructions that create a sight restriction shall be permitted
within the clear sight triangle, as shown on the “Standard Drawing(s) for Sight
Distance Requirements” incorporated into the Traffic Policy Paper promulgated,
from time to time, by the Department of Development Services and on file with
the City Clerk.
(Ord. MC-783, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.30.030 OBSTRUCTIONS.
   Obstructions shall include any object extending more than two and one-half
feet above the pavement, at the curb lines of the intersecting streets, such as
trees, shrubs, fences, walls, newspaper racks, utility facilities, bus shelters
and the like. Trees, trimmed to a minimum height of eight feet above ground;
traffic signals; and street light poles shall not be considered as
obstructions, unless a finding is made by the Traffic Engineer that they
constitute a sight restriction based on the size, trunk diameter, number in a
small area or number in a row. Legally parked motor vehicles shall not
constitute an obstruction.
(Ord. MC-783, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 12.30.040 EXISTING OBSTRUCTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to conditions existing on the effective date of
this chapter, but as pre-existing corner sight obstructions are discovered,
which may affect the health and safety of residents of the city, the provisions
of this chapter may be looked to as guidelines as to how such sight
obstructions may be remedied.
(Ord. MC-783, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 12.30.050 STREET TREES.
   Removal of street trees shall be in accordance with
Chapter 12.40.
(Ord. MC-783, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 12.30.060 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-783, passed 5-6-1991)
CHAPTER 12.32: HOUSE NUMBERS
Section
   
12.32.010   Adoption of numbering system
   
12.32.020   Assignment of address numbers
   
12.32.030   Requirement for number
   
12.32.040   Violations of sections 12.32.010 through 12.32.030 - penalty
   
12.32.050   Curb house number business license required
   
12.32.060   Size and color of house numbers
   
12.32.070   Violation of sections 12.32.050 through 12.32.060
§ 12.32.010 ADOPTION OF NUMBERING SYSTEM.
   The following system for the numbering of the buildings in the city is
adopted: commencing at First, on A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I and such other
streets as may exist, or may hereafter be established running in the same
direction as said A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I Streets, with the number 100, and
number north to the north boundary line of said city, allowing 100 numbers to
each block of 600 feet, exclusive of street intersections; and commencing at A
Street, on 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and such other
streets as exist or may hereafter be established running in the same direction
as said last named streets with the number 100 and number west to the west
boundary line of said city, allowing 100 numbers to each block of 600 feet,
exclusive of street intersections, and commencing at 1st Street, on A, B, C, D,
E, F, G, H, I and such other streets as may exist, or may hereafter be
established running in the same direction as said last named streets, with the
number 100, and number south to the south boundary line of said city, allowing
100 numbers to each block of 600 feet, exclusive of street intersections, and
commencing at A Street on 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and
such other streets exist or may hereafter be established running in the same
direction as the last named streets, with the number 100 and number east to the
east boundary line of said city, allowing 100 numbers to each block of 600 feet
exclusive of street intersections; with the even numbers placed on the north
and west sides of said streets, and the odd numbers on the south and east side
of streets.
(Ord. 102, passed 11-17-1891)
§ 12.32.020 ASSIGNMENT OF ADDRESS NUMBERS.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Building Official, or his or her
designee, to assign building address numbers. The Building Official shall give
written notice to the owner, occupant, lessee, tenant or subtenant of the
assignment of an address number. Address numbers that are already in place
shall not be required to be changed unless a conflict exists, the street name
is changed or some other condition occurs that necessitates an address be
changed. The size and location of address numbers shall be in accordance with
the adopted Building and Fire Codes.
(Ord. 102, passed 11-17-1891; Ord. MC-1337, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. MC-1395,
passed 1-6-2014)
§ 12.32.030 REQUIREMENT FOR NUMBER.
   It is unlawful to keep or maintain any building or entrance in the city
without the proper number being placed thereon.
(Ord. 102, passed 11-17-1891)
§ 12.32.040 VIOLATIONS OF SECTIONS 12.32.010 THROUGH 12.32.030 - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of §§
12.32.010 through
12.32.030, or who refuses or neglects to comply with the notice required to be
given within five days after receiving such notice, is guilty of an infraction,
which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions
of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 102, passed 11-17-1891; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 12.32.050 CURB HOUSE NUMBER BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, co-partnership or
association, either as owner, agent or otherwise, to paint or otherwise place
house numbers on curbs of streets in the city without first obtaining a curb
house number business license from the Department of Finance and Management
Services, and paying the fee therefor.
(Ord. 2163, passed 2-19-1957; Ord. 3346, passed 5-11-1973; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 12.32.060 SIZE AND COLOR OF HOUSE NUMBERS.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1337, passed 11-15-2010 and Ord. MC-1395, passed 1-6-2014)
§ 12.32.070 VIOLATION OF SECTIONS 12.32.050 THROUGH 12.32.060.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §§
12.32.050 through 12.32.060 is guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction
thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 2163, passed 2-19-1957; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 12.36: STREET GRADES
Section
   
12.36.010   Definitions
   
12.36.020   Conformance of street grades
   
12.36.030   Construction of buildings below street grade unlawful
   
12.36.040   Violation of Section 12.36.030 - penalty
§ 12.36.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CENTERLINE. A line in the middle of the street along its course with an
equal distance between it and the street line on each side.
   CURB. A street improvement generally constructed of cement concrete, six
inches wide at the top, nine inches wide at the bottom and 15 inches in height,
with the top edge nearest the centerline of the street constructed to conform
to the curb line of the street, and the side nearest the street line
constructed perpendicular and the top and bottom constructed horizontal. Said
word may refer to a CURB already constructed or which might be hereafter
constructed and in places where no CURB exists, where the word is used as
designating a location, it shall be presumed to exist.
   CURB LINE. The line at the top of the curb at the edge nearest the
centerline of the street. The CURB LINE on all streets, unless otherwise
provided by ordinance, shall be the distance from the property line as provided
by § 2 of Ord. 338 of the city, entitled “An Ordinance establishing the width
of sidewalks within the City of San Bernardino and establishing the width of
cement sidewalks that may hereafter be constructed in said City” adopted and
approved September 17, 1906.
   GUTTER LINE. The line along the face of the curb at the top of the roadway
and ten inches below the top of the curb.
   PROPERTY LINE. The boundary line along the street of any abutting land.
   ROADWAY. All that portion of the street between the curbs, and at
intersections shall include that portion of the street described between the
curb lines of the street extended along the course of the street across the
intersecting street. In extending such curb lines, the lines shall produce a
straight line between the points of intersection of the curb lines of the
described street with the curb lines of the intersecting street.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb line and the property
line.
   STREET. Any land which has been dedicated and accepted according to law as a
public street or highway, or which has been in common and undisputed use for
general highway purposes by the public for a period of not less than five
years. Such word shall be deemed to include avenues, highways, lanes, alleys,
crossings or intersections, courts and places.
   STREET LINE. Means, such as, for example, “the south line of Third Street,”
the boundary line of the street along the course of the street. At
intersections, such line shall be deemed to cross the intersecting street from
one corner of the intersection to the other corner on the same side of the
street.
(Ord. 756, passed 1-4-1920)
§ 12.36.020 CONFORMANCE OF STREET GRADES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, or unless otherwise
provided for by resolution of the Mayor and City Council, or upon plans adopted
for the improvement of any street within the city by the Mayor and City
Council, the grades of all streets in the city are established in conformity
with the grades already established along such streets or which may be
hereafter established along such streets, as follows.
      (1)   Where the grade is established along the curb line:
         (a)   The grade of the street along the curb line shall be a straight
line drawn between described points;
         (b)   The grade at the property line at right angles to the curb line
shall be higher than the grade at the curb line at the rate of one-quarter of
an inch per foot of distance between the curb line and the property line; and
         (c)   The grade of the centerline of the street between the two curb
lines shall be an average of the grade at the curb lines taken at right angles
to the centerline of the street.
      (2)   Where the grade of the street is established along the property
line:
         (a)   The grade of the street along the property line shall be a
straight line drawn between described points; and
         (b)   The grade at the curb line at right angles to the property line
shall be lower than the grade at the property line at the rate of one-quarter
of an inch per foot of distance between the curb line and the property line.
      (3)   The grade of the sidewalk shall be a straight line drawn between
the grade at the curb line and the grade at the property line taken at right
angles with either curb line or property line.
   (B)   The grade of the roadway taken at right angles to the curb line shall
conform to a curved line which shall be a parabola intersecting gutter lines on
each side or roadway and centerline of street.
   (C)   The grade of the street at the gutter line shall be ten inches below
the grade at the curb line.
   (D)   Unless it clearly appears to the contrary, the grade of all streets
heretofore established shall be construed to have been established in
accordance with the grades established, and all ordinances establishing the
grades of any street in the city subsequently adopted by the Mayor and City
Council of the city shall be deemed to have been passed and adopted in the
light of this section, and the grades of any such street shall be deemed
established along and across any such street in accordance with the provisions
of this section unless a contrary intention clearly appears.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 1301, passed 5-12-1926)
§ 12.36.030 CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS BELOW STREET GRADE UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful to erect, build or construct any building, structure or
improvement within the city below the official grade of the street as
determined by the Mayor and City Council except as follows: that, in the event
that the City Engineer determines, by reason of mountains, hills or other
topography, that it is impractical to conform to the official grade, then, and,
in that event, the City Engineer shall notify the Chief Building Inspector of
such determination and an exception shall be granted hereto permitting the
erection or construction of buildings and structures at other than the official
grade.
(Ord. 1900, passed 11-30-1950; Ord. 2265, passed 6-23-1959)
§ 12.36.040 VIOLATION OF SECTION 12.36.030 - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of §
12.36.030 is guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction thereof, is
punishable in accordance with §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 1900, passed 11-30-1950; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 12.40: STREET TREES
Section
   
12.40.010   Definitions
   
12.40.020   Street tree master plan
   
12.40.030   Conformance with street tree master plan
   
12.40.040   Petition of property owners for change in variety of trees
   
12.40.050   Removal of city tree - duty of Director of Public Services
   
12.40.060   Authorized removal of tree - criteria
   
12.40.070   Permit required for cutting, trimming and the like
   
12.40.080   Application for permit
   
12.40.090   Compliance with permit
   
12.40.100   Cost of removal of trees
   
12.40.110   Unlawful acts
   
12.40.120   Height of plants
   
12.40.130   Duty of property owner and abatement of nuisance
   
12.40.140   Violation - penalty
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on the planting of trees along public streets, see Cal.
Streets and Highways Code, §§ 22000 et seq.
§ 12.40.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR OF PARKS, RECREATION, AND COMMUNITY SERVICES. Any designated
representative of such Director.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICES. Any authorized representative of such Director.
(Ord. 1655, passed 4-8-1941; Ord. 3016, passed 9-23-1969; Ord. MC-325, passed
12-6-1983; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 12.40.020 STREET TREE MASTER PLAN.
   All streets, sidewalks, parkways, lanes, alleys, parks and other public
places in the city now open or dedicated, or which may be hereafter opened or
dedicated to public use, may be planted with trees, palms, shrubs, bushes,
plants and flowers as specifically provided in the street tree master plan on
file in the Parks, Recreation and Community Services Department.
(Ord. 1655, passed 4-8-1941; Ord. 3016, passed 9-23-1969; Ord. MC-325, passed
12-6-1983)
§ 12.40.030 CONFORMANCE WITH STREET TREE MASTER PLAN.
   It is unlawful for anyone to plant trees, shrubs or bushes upon the streets,
sidewalks, parkways, lanes, alleys, parks and other public places to which the
master plan is applicable, except in conformity with the master plan.
(Ord. 1655, passed 4-8-1941; Ord. 3016, passed 9-23-1969; Ord. MC-325, passed
12-6-1983)
§ 12.40.040 PETITION OF PROPERTY OWNERS FOR CHANGE IN VARIETY OF TREES.
   In the event a petition bearing the signatures of not less than 75% of the
property owners owning property fronting upon any city street, sidewalk,
parkway, lane, alley, park or other public place which is one block long or
more, requests a change in the variety of trees used for planting in the place
referred to in the petition, the petition shall be granted by the Director of
Public Services, following consultation with the Director of Parks, Recreation
and Community Services if the variety requested for replacement or new planting
is known and established as a street tree and is not of a variety that may tend
to break sidewalks or curbs or is not objectionable as a street tree for other
reasons.
(Ord. 1655, passed 4-8-1941; Ord. 3016, passed 9-23-1969; Ord. MC-325, passed
12-6-1983; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 12.40.050 REMOVAL OF CITY TREE - DUTY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICES.
   Upon receipt of a request for the removal of a city tree or for a change in
the type of tree designated in the master plan, the Director of Public Services
shall investigate and respond in writing to the request, with a copy to the
Council member of the ward. The Director’s decision shall be final unless an
appeal to the Mayor and City Council is filed with the City Clerk pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 2.64.
(Ord. 1655, passed 4-8-1941; Ord. 3016, passed 9-23-1969; Ord. MC-325, passed
12-6-1983; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 12.40.060 AUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF TREE - CRITERIA.
   The Director of Public Services is authorized to remove or approve the
removal of those trees which:
   (A)   Are diseased;
   (B)   Constitute a traffic hazard;
   (C)   Threaten to damage sidewalks, curbs or gutters;
   (D)   Are not in conformity with adopted specifications:
   (E)   Interfere with street widening;
   (F)   Are located in a business district;
   (G)   Obstruct the moving of houses;
   (H)   Block proposed driveways or entrances to private property; or
   (I)   Interfere with or damage sewers or water lines.
(Ord. 1655, passed 4-8-1941; Ord. 3016, passed 9-23-1969; Ord. MC-325, passed
12-6-1983; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 12.40.070 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CUTTING, TRIMMING AND THE LIKE.
   It is unlawful for any person, persons or corporation to cut down, trim,
take up, remove, prune or injure any trees, shrubs, palms or flowers that are
now planted or grown on any of the public streets, sidewalks, parkways, lanes,
alleys, parks or other public places of the city, except after procuring a
permit from the office of the Director of Public Services. A permit fee
established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council shall be collected,
except that no fee shall be paid for any work required by any city department
or performed pursuant to a contract with the city.
(Ord. 1655, passed 4-8-1941; Ord. 2273, passed 9-22-1959; Ord. MC-325, passed
12-6-1983; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 12.40.080 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person desiring to procure a permit, as specified in §
12.40.070, shall apply, in writing, to the Director of Public Services, who may
require a good and sufficient bond in such sum as may be fixed by the Director,
conditioned that the applicant will pay the city all costs and damages
resulting from the removing, trimming, pruning of trees, shrubs or bushes, and
the Director may, in his or her discretion, require the furnishing of a bond or
policy of insurance to cover any and all claims for damages to persons or
property resulting from the removal, pruning or trimming of trees, shrubs or
bushes. The Director may establish other conditions to the permit for
protection of persons and property.
(Ord. 1655, passed 4-8-1941; Ord. MC-325, passed 12-6-1983; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984)
§ 12.40.090 COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT.
   Upon the issuance of any permit, the applicant shall comply with each
condition of the permit and shall, at least 18 hours before commencing work,
notify the Director of Public Services to cause a field inspection to be made.
(Ord. 1655, passed 4-8-1941; Ord. MC-325, passed 12-6-1983; Ord. MC-344, passed
2-22-1984)
§ 12.40.100 COST OF REMOVAL OF TREES.
   In the event of a request for the removal of trees by the Director of Public
Services under the provisions of §
12.40.060, 60 days’ notice shall be given on all trees except palms, and 30
days’ notice shall be given in the case of palm trees, except when the trees
constitute a hazard. There shall be paid to the city by the person requesting
removal a sum to compensate for the reasonable cost of the removal of the tree
or trees, together with a reasonable sum to box, remove, replant and conserve
the tree or trees so removed, if applicable. Such sums shall be fixed by the
Director of Public Services and shall be paid prior to removal.
(Ord. 1655, passed 4-8-1941; Ord. 3016, passed 9-23-1969; Ord. MC-325, passed
12-6-1983; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 12.40.110 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to carve or injure the bark of any tree,
shrub, palm or bush that is planted or grown on any of the public streets,
sidewalks, parkways, lanes, alleys, parks or other public places in the city.
It is unlawful for any person to attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to
the tree, shrub, palm or plant; to cause or permit anyone to dig in or
otherwise disturb grass areas in public places, or in any other way injure or
impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any public area; to cause or permit
any wire charged with electricity to come in contact with the tree, shrub, palm
or plant; to allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to
the tree, shrub, palm or plant to come in contact therewith.
(Ord. 1655, passed 4-8-1941; Ord. MC-325, passed 12-6-1983; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985)
§ 12.40.120 HEIGHT OF PLANTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any corner lot in the city
to keep, permit or maintain trees, hedges, shrubs or any growth within the
sight triangle, as shown on the standard drawing(s) referenced in §
12.30.020, unless the trees, shrubs, hedges or other growth are trimmed so that
the height of same shall not exceed two and one-half feet above the pavement at
the curb lines of the intersecting streets, except that trees with main stalks
or trunks exposed to a height of eight feet above the ground need not be
trimmed or cut, unless directed to do so by the Director of Development
Services.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises in the city
to permit, keep or maintain hedges, shrubs or any growth over two feet in
height within a distance of six feet from the property line at any point within
six feet of a driveway, except that trees with main stalks or trunks exposed to
a height of eight feet above the ground need not be trimmed or cut, unless the
trees are determined to constitute a sight restriction to the Director of
Development Services.
(Ord. 1655, passed 4-8-1941; Ord. 2273, passed 9-22-1959; Ord. MC-325, passed
12-6-1983; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-783, passed 5-6-1991; Ord.
MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.40.130 DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER AND ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   The owner or occupant described in §§
12.40.110 and
12.40.120 and other property owners fronting any street, sidewalk, parkway,
lane, alley, park or other public place shall water, keep, maintain and permit
trees, hedges, shrubs or any other growth located thereon in accordance with
this chapter and other ordinances of the city or rules and regulations of the
Director of Public Services.
   (B)   Any tree, shrub or palm growing on any parkway or sidewalk which is
damaged in violation of §
12.40.110 or any growth of any tree, shrub or hedge or other vegetation which
is in excess of the height limits set forth in §
12.40.120, unless otherwise permitted by the Traffic Engineer, is declared a
public nuisance, the removal of which is necessary to protect the health and
safety of the city’s inhabitants. The Director of Development Services may find
and declare the same to be a public nuisance, may order abatement thereof in
accordance with the procedure set for abatement pursuant to
Chapter 8.30 and may assess costs for the abatement pursuant to
Chapter 3.68.
(Ord. 1655, passed 4-8-1941; Ord. 2273, passed 9-22-1959; Ord. MC-325, passed
12-6-1983; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984; Ord. MC-783, passed 5-6-1991; Ord.
MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
Editor’s note:
   Ord. MC-1418, passed 10-5-2015 repealed/deleted
Chapter 3.68 and stated that any remaining provisions of the municipal code
that reference it should now be deemed to instead reference
Chapter 8.30, which it also amended.
§ 12.40.140 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 1885, passed 5-2-1952; Ord. MC-325, passed 12-6-1983; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 12.44: OBSTRUCTIONS
Section
   
12.44.010   Prohibited deposits on street
   
12.44.020   Depositing salt on streets unlawful
   
12.44.030   Streets, sidewalks and crosswalks to be kept free of obstructions
   
12.44.040   Draining water on streets unlawful - penalty
   
12.44.050   Nuisance
   
12.44.060   Disposal of dead animals and rubbish, garbage or filth
   
12.44.070   Maintenance of premises
   
12.44.080   Violation of Sections 12.44.040 through 12.44.070 - penalty
   
12.44.090   Use of sidewalks for display of goods, wares or merchandise
unlawful
   
12.44.100   Removal of goods, wares and merchandise
   
12.44.110   Projection of signs
   
12.44.120   Violation of Sections 12.44.090 through 12.44.110 - penalty
Statutory reference:
   For provisions authorizing cities to prevent encroachment and obstruction of
city streets, see Cal. Gov’t Code, § 38775
§ 12.44.010 PROHIBITED DEPOSITS ON STREET.
   It is unlawful for any person to deposit on any public street any bottles,
broken ware, rubbish, waste paper, garbage, filth, refuse, dead animals or
brine.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921)
§ 12.44.020 DEPOSITING SALT ON STREETS UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person to deposit upon any paved street within the
city any brine, salt, water containing any salts or any matter which is
injurious to such pavement.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921)
§ 12.44.030 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS TO BE KEPT FREE OF OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   The public streets, sidewalks and crosswalks of the city, and the
stairways, escalators, elevators, passageways and sidewalks in or surrounding
public malls or buildings owned, operated or maintained by the city, and the
entrances and exits to and from public halls, meeting places and public
buildings within the boundaries of the city, being intended for the
accommodation and convenience of the public, shall be kept and reserved free
from all obstructions, including, but not limited to, obstructions by human
beings.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously stand or
sit in, obstruct or occupy any public street, sidewalk or crosswalk, or sit,
stand in, obstruct or occupy any public stairway, escalator, elevator,
passageway or sidewalk in or immediately surrounding a public mall or building
owned, operated or maintained by the city, or stand, sit in, occupy or obstruct
the entrance or exit to and from any public hall, meeting place and public
building within the boundaries of the city, so as in any manner to obstruct the
free passage thereon or to hinder, molest or annoy any person while passing
along the same.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 120, passed 9-13-1892; Ord. 3711, passed 3-7-1978; Ord. 3950, passed 7-9-
1980; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 12.44.040 DRAINING WATER ON STREETS UNLAWFUL - PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drain water or to permit water to be
drained, or to cause or permit water, except rainwater, to flow or escape from
his or her lands onto any public street, alley, way, highway, park or other
public place by any means which results in damage to the street, alley, way,
highway, park or other public place, or which causes interference with or
damage or hazard to public travel or use. It is unlawful to place, or cause to
be placed, in any street, alley, way, highway, park or other public place any
obstruction which causes interference with, or damage or hazard to, public
travel or use.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 151, passed 1-16-1894; Ord. 2347, passed 3-27-1961; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985)
§ 12.44.050 NUISANCE.
   The existence of anything prohibited by §
12.44.040 is a nuisance, and it shall be the duty of the Marshal or any police
officer, or the Director of Public Services, to immediately abate such nuisance
upon knowledge of its existence.
(Ord. 151, passed 1-16-1894; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 12.44.060 DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS AND RUBBISH, GARBAGE OR FILTH.
   Whenever any domestic or domesticated animal is killed or dies within this
city, the owner or person having possession, charge or control thereof shall,
immediately after its death, dispose of the dead body or carcass of such animal
so that it shall not become a nuisance or in any way injurious to health, or
indecent or offensive to the senses. No person shall throw into or place or
deposit upon any public park, street, alley or other highway or public place,
except in such place or places as may be designated by the proper officer, any
broken ware, rubbish, garbage or filth.
(Ord. 151, passed 1-16-1894)
§ 12.44.070 MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES.
   Every owner or occupant of any house or houses, or other premises in this
city, or person having possession, charge or control thereof, shall keep the
house or houses, or other premises, and the premises around and about such
house or houses, clean of all filth or anything creating offensive odors or
detrimental to health.
(Ord. 151, passed 1-16-1894)
§ 12.44.080 VIOLATION OF SECTIONS 12.44.040 THROUGH 12.44.070 - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of §§
12.44.040 through
12.44.070 is guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is
punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 151, passed 1-16-1894; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 12.44.090 USE OF SIDEWALKS FOR DISPLAY OF GOODS, WARES OR MERCHANDISE
UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or make use of the
public sidewalks of the city for the display of goods, wares or merchandise or
to leave or permit to remain upon any portion of the public streets of the city
any goods, wares, merchandise, boxes, barrels, cases, packages, trucks or such
other objects or things as will obstruct or prevent the free use and passage
thereon.
(Ord. 475, passed 2-13-1912)
§ 12.44.100 REMOVAL OF GOODS, WARES AND MERCHANDISE.
   Goods, wares and merchandise delivered or received upon the public sidewalks
of the city shall immediately be taken or removed therefrom by the owner or
person in charge thereof; provided that goods, wares or merchandise received in
bulk or packages of such size or weight that the same cannot be immediately
removed, as aforesaid, the owner or person in charge thereof shall remove or
cause the same to be removed within four hours from the time of delivery
thereof; and provided, further, that pending such removal of such goods, wares
or merchandise, the same shall occupy the outer edge or space of the sidewalk,
the inner line of such space shall be parallel with the curb line and not more
than three feet distant therefrom.
(Ord. 475, passed 2-13-1912)
§ 12.44.110 PROJECTION OF SIGNS.
   No provision of §§
12.44.090 through
12.44.120 shall be construed to prohibit the projection of signs over public
property in conformity with Ords. 1991 (Title 19, Zoning) (now replaced) and
2623 (
Chapter 16.04) or other ordinances and laws in effect in the city.
(Ord. 475, passed 2-13-1912; Ord. 2997, passed 7-1-1969)
§ 12.44.120 VIOLATION OF SECTIONS 12.44.090 THROUGH 12.44.110 - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of §§
12.44.090 through
12.44.110 is guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is
punishable in accordance with §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 475, passed 2-13-1912; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 12.48: BRIDGES
Section
   
12.48.010   Driving animals over bridge - restrictions - violation and penalty
   
12.48.020   Unlawful placement of bridges
   
12.48.030   Notice to remove bridges
   
12.48.040   Duty to remove bridge
   
12.48.050   Violation of Sections 12.48.020 through 12.48.040 - penalty
§ 12.48.010 DRIVING ANIMALS OVER BRIDGE - RESTRICTIONS - VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It is not lawful to drive, lead or conduct any cattle, horses, mules,
sheep, goats or hogs, or, in any manner, cause any such animals to go across or
upon any bridge in or upon any of the streets, avenues or highways in this
city, in any greater number than 25 head of cattle, horses or mules, or 50
sheep, goats or hogs, at one time.
   (B)   Any person violating division (A) above is guilty of an infraction,
which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions
of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-27-1892; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 12.48.020 UNLAWFUL PLACEMENT OF BRIDGES.
   It is unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, or to keep
and maintain, any bridge or crossing over and across the gutter along either
side of any paved or macadamized street in the city.
(Ord. 111, passed 5-17-1892)
§ 12.48.030 NOTICE TO REMOVE BRIDGES.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Services to notify any person
maintaining any such bridge or crossing to have the same removed within ten
days from the date of such notice and to cut down the curb and slope the
sidewalk so as to permit the easy passage of vehicles, should any such passage
be required for access to private property.
(Ord. 111, passed 5-17-1892; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 12.48.040 DUTY TO REMOVE BRIDGE.
   Upon receiving such notice from the Director of Public Services, it shall be
the duty of the person receiving the same to at once comply with the provisions
of §
12.48.030.
(Ord. 111, passed 5-17-1892; Ord. MC-344, passed 2-22-1984)
§ 12.48.050 VIOLATION OF SECTIONS 12.48.020 THROUGH 12.48.040 - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of §§
12.48.020 through
12.48.040 is guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is
punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 111, passed 5-17-1892; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 12.52: FIRE HYDRANTS
Section
   
12.52.010   Persons authorized to use hydrants - prohibited acts
   
12.52.020   Parking vehicles near hydrant
   
12.52.030   Distance poles and wires to be kept from hydrant
   
12.52.040   Violation - penalty
§ 12.52.010 PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO USE HYDRANTS - PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person, except members of the City Fire Department,
to use any fire hydrant in the city or to interfere with, tamper with or in any
way molest any fire hydrant in the city except through special permission of
the City Fire Chief and ratified by the Superintendent of the City Municipal
Water Department.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 1263, passed 12-8-1925)
§ 12.52.020 PARKING VEHICLES NEAR HYDRANT.
   It is unlawful for any person to hitch or leave standing any carriage,
wagon, horse, truck, automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or any other such vehicle
or animal within 15 feet of any fire hydrant within the city.
(Ord. 562, passed 4-6-1914)
§ 12.52.030 DISTANCE POLES AND WIRES TO BE KEPT FROM HYDRANT.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place or erect any
pole to carry or support electric, telephone or telegraph wires, or other
similar devices, within five feet of any fire hydrant within the city.
(Ord. 562, passed 4-6-1914)
§ 12.52.040 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is
guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 562, passed 4-6-1914; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 12.56: PARADES
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1414, passed 7-6-2015)
Statutory reference:
   For authority for cities to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages
on the highways, see Cal. Vehicle Code, § 21100
CHAPTER 12.60: VENDING NEAR PUBLIC SCHOOLS
Section
   
12.60.010   Distance from public schools
   
12.60.020   Violation - penalty
§ 12.60.010 DISTANCE FROM PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to vend, sell or give
away ice cream, ices, cornucopias, candy or soda-water from vehicles upon the
public streets of the city within 12,000 feet of any public school house,
except on Saturdays and Sundays.
(Ord. 614, passed 11-1-1915)
§ 12.60.020 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is
guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 614, passed 11-1-1915; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 12.64: MOTION PICTURE AND TELEVISION PRODUCTION PERMITS
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1414, passed 7-6-2015)
CHAPTER 12.68: PARK AND SCHOOL GROUNDS
Section
   
12.68.010   Operation of vehicles in designated areas only
   
12.68.020   Hours of use
   
12.68.030   Violation - penalty
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on municipal regulation of parks, see Cal. Public Resources
Code, §§ 5181 et seq.
§ 12.68.010 OPERATION OF VEHICLES IN DESIGNATED AREAS ONLY.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate, drive or ride a bicycle, unicycle,
tricycle, motorcycle, horse or any other animal in any public park or on school
grounds except in areas designated and posted specifically for such use.
(Ord. 295, passed 12-15-1903; Ord. 3455, passed 11-5-1974; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985)
§ 12.68.020 HOURS OF USE.
   (A)   During the months of January, February, March, October, November and
December of each and every year, it is unlawful for any person to be or remain
in any public park between the hours of 6:00 p.m. of any day to 6:00 a.m. of
the succeeding day, except upon written approval of the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Community Services or the Mayor and City Council. During the
months of April, May, June, July, August and September of each and every year,
it is unlawful for any person to be or remain in any public park between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. of any day to 6:00 a.m. of the succeeding day, except upon
written approval of the Director of Parks, Recreation and Community Services or
the Mayor and City Council. Notwithstanding the provisions of the first two
sentences herein, person(s) who are utilizing the lighted activity portions of
the public park for those intended lighted activities (including the time
necessary to go to and from the intended lighted activities), when no such
written approval is required for such intended lighted activities, may remain
in the public park until the hour of 10:00 p.m., but thereafter it is unlawful
for any such person(s) to be or remain in any public park between the hours of
10:00 p.m. of any day to 6:00 a.m. of the succeeding day.
   (B)   This section shall not be applicable to any person who is present in
the park performing duties relating to employment by the city.
   (C)   The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall be authorized to
close any city park whenever, in his or her best judgment, it is necessary for
the health, safety and welfare of the community. It is unlawful for any person
to be or remain in any public park after having been informed that such park
has been closed by order of the Chief of Police, or his or her designee.
(Ord. 295, passed 12-15-1903; Ord. 3455, passed 11-5-1974; Ord. 3698, passed
12-21-1977; Ord. 3868, passed 9-18-1979; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord.
MC-1152, passed 10-8-2003)
§ 12.68.030 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 295, passed 12-15-1903; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 12.72: CLOCKS
Section
   
12.72.010   Permit - required for clocks overhanging public streets
   
12.72.020   Application for permit
   
12.72.030   Termination of permit for cause
   
12.72.040   Clocks to indicate correct time
   
12.72.050   Violation - penalty
§ 12.72.010 PERMIT - REQUIRED FOR CLOCKS OVERHANGING PUBLIC STREETS.
   It is unlawful for anyone to install, erect, maintain or operate a clock or
device which tells or indicates the time upon or overhanging the public streets
of the city without first obtaining a permit from the City Council.
(Ord. 1739, passed 4-12-1945)
§ 12.72.020 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person so desiring to procure a permit to erect, install, maintain or
operate a clock or device to tell or indicate the time shall make written
application to the Mayor and City Council stating therein the name or make of
the clock or device; the plan or manner in which the clock or device is to be
erected, installed, maintained or operated; the amount of advertising matter to
be displayed thereon or in connection therewith; and such other information as
the Council may, from time to time, desire.
(Ord. 1739, passed 4-12-1945)
§ 12.72.030 TERMINATION OF PERMIT FOR CAUSE.
   The permit so issued may be terminated, at any time, by the Mayor and City
Council upon the following grounds:
   (A)   The clock or device has not been installed, erected, maintained or
operated in accordance with the permit granted;
   (B)   The clock or device is or has been maintained for a period of 30 days
in such condition that it does not show, indicate or tell the correct time; and
   (C)   It is necessary or advantageous that public or private improvements be
made upon the streets which necessitate or render it advantageous that the
clock or device be removed.
(Ord. 1739, passed 4-12-1945)
§ 12.72.040 CLOCKS TO INDICATE CORRECT TIME.
   It is unlawful for anyone to permit, maintain, operate or own a clock or
device which does not tell, indicate or show the correct time and which has
been erected or installed upon the public streets of the city or which
overhangs the public streets; provided that the face of any clock or device may
be covered during the period necessary for repairs but not to exceed a period
of 30 days without permission of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 1739, passed 4-12-1945)
§ 12.72.050 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is
guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 1739, passed 4-12-1945; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 12.76: SECCOMBE LAKE PARK
Section
   
12.76.010   Change of name
   
12.76.020   Swimming in lake unlawful
   
12.76.030   Operation of boats by permission only
   
12.76.040   Ducks, geese and fowl to be left unharmed
   
12.76.045   Fishing unlawful
   
12.76.050   Violation - penalty
§ 12.76.010 CHANGE OF NAME.
   On and after August 28, 1967, Inland Lake Park shall be known as Seccombe
Lake Park and the lake situated therein shall be known as Seccombe Lake.
(Ord. 1761, passed 5-25-1946; Ord. 2844, passed 8-29-1967)
§ 12.76.020 SWIMMING IN LAKE UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for anyone to swim or bathe in the lake situated in Seccombe
Lake Park in the city.
(Ord. 1761, passed 5-25-1946)
§ 12.76.030 OPERATION OF BOATS BY PERMISSION ONLY.
   It is unlawful for anyone to paddle, row, pole or in any way launch, operate
or propel a boat, canoe, raft or any floating conveyance upon the lake situated
in Seccombe Lake Park in the city, except with the permission of, and subject
to any regulations that may be imposed by, the City Council.
(Ord. 1761, passed 5-25-1946; Ord. 2700, passed 11-2-1965)
§ 12.76.040 DUCKS, GEESE AND FOWL TO BE LEFT UNHARMED.
   It is unlawful for anyone to kill, maim or injure, in any way, any duck,
goose or any fowl kept, maintained or situated in Seccombe Lake Park in the
city.
(Ord. 1761, passed 5-25-1946)
§ 12.76.045 FISHING UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for anyone to fish on the lake except in designated areas and
subject to any regulations imposed by the California Fish and Game Laws and to
any regulation that may be imposed by the City Council.
(Ord. MC-489, passed 1-8-1986)
Statutory reference:
   California Fish and Game Laws, see Cal. Fish and Game Code, §§ 1 et seq. and
Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 14
§ 12.76.050 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 1761, passed 5-25-1946; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 12.80: PUBLIC PARKS AND
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
Section
   
12.80.010   Short title
   
12.80.020   Definitions
   
12.80.030   Use of parks and buildings exclusive
   
12.80.040   Permit - required
   
12.80.050   Park and recreation sponsored classes - permit required
   
12.80.055   Consumption of alcohol in a public park - permit required
   
12.80.060   Application for permit
   
12.80.070   Issuance of permit
   
12.80.080   Denial of permit
   
12.80.090   Right of appeal of denial of permit or conditions imposed on
issuance of permit
   
12.80.100   Fees and deposits
   
12.80.110   Liability
   
12.80.120   Displays and sales
   
12.80.130   Park regulations
   
12.80.140   Violation - penalty
§ 12.80.010 SHORT TITLE.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Parks and
Recreation Ordinance.”
(Ord. 3326, passed 1-3-1973)
§ 12.80.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMPLIFIED SOUND. Speech or music, projected or transmitted by electronic
equipment, including amplifiers, loudspeakers, microphones, bull horns or
similar devices which are intended to increase the volume, range, distance or
intensity of speech or music and are powered by electricity, battery or
combustible fuel.
   BUILDING. Any building, or portion thereof, under the supervision of the
City Parks and Recreation Department.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
   INLINE SKATES. Skates which are attached to a boot, shoe or other footwear
to be worn by the skater.
   PARK. All grounds, roadways, avenues, park facilities, municipal parks and
playground areas, or portions thereof, under the supervision of the Parks and
Recreation Department.
   PERMIT. A permit for exclusive use of any park or building, or portions
thereof, as provided for in this chapter.
   PERSON. Persons, groups, associations, partnerships, firms or corporations
unless the context in which such word is used indicates the singular word
person was intended.
(Ord. 3326, passed 1-3-1973; Ord. MC-1185, passed 10-5-2004)
§ 12.80.030 USE OF PARKS AND BUILDINGS EXCLUSIVE.
   The city’s public parks and buildings, or portions thereof, may be made
available for the exclusive use of persons subject to the issuance of a permit
by the Director as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 3326, passed 1-3-1973)
§ 12.80.040 PERMIT - REQUIRED.
   (A)   For any private groups of persons using a public park that have fewer
than 25, no permit is required.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any group of persons, firm or corporation, society
or organization which anticipates an attendance of more than 25 to conduct any
picnic, celebration, parade, service or exercise in any public park or building
or use any park facility, without first obtaining a written permit from the
Director as provided for in this chapter.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any group of persons, firm or corporation, society
or organization which anticipates an attendance of more than 100 to conduct any
picnic, celebration, parade, service or exercise in any public park or building
or use any park facility, without first obtaining a special event permit
pursuant to § 19.70.036.
(Ord. 3326, passed 1-3-1973; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1414,
passed 7-6-2015)
§ 12.80.050 PARK AND RECREATION SPONSORED CLASSES - PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, society or organization to
hold classes, courses of instruction or any activity where a fee or any form of
compensation is charged or anything of value is obtained in a park or building,
except in accordance with a written permit issued by the Director for such
classes, courses of instruction or activity sponsored by or approved by the
Department of Parks and Recreation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 3326, passed 1-3-1973; Ord. 3525, passed 9-10-1975; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985)
§ 12.80.055 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN A PUBLIC PARK - PERMIT REQUIRED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1414, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 12.80.060 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1414, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 12.80.070 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1414, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 12.80.080 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1414, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 12.80.090 RIGHT OF APPEAL OF DENIAL OF PERMIT OR CONDITIONS IMPOSED ON
ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1414, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 12.80.100 FEES AND DEPOSITS.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1414, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 12.80.110 LIABILITY.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1414, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 12.80.120 DISPLAYS AND SALES.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1414, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 12.80.130 PARK REGULATIONS.
   Within the limits of any public park or playground in or upon any facility
or building located therein and owned or controlled by the city, it is unlawful
for any person to:
   (A)   Cause the amplification of sound exceeding 25 watts total output from
all channels of equipment used except pursuant to an exclusive use permit
issued under this chapter and subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   The location of any bandstand and the position of each loudspeaker
shall be as specified by the Director so as to allow the least amount of
amplified sound to be audible in any adjacent residential neighborhoods.
      (2)   Amplified sound shall not exceed 95 decibels (“dba”) at a point 50
feet in front of the center point of the distance between loudspeaker
installations.
   (B)   Play or practice golf or use golf clubs in any area not designated for
such use;
   (C)   Operate any motor-driven model airplane except in areas designated for
such use;
   (D)   Operate or park any motor vehicle, as defined in the California
Vehicle Code within a park, except upon areas designated for such use;
   (E)   Operate, drive or ride upon any bicycle, unicycle, tricycle, horse or
any other animal in any park except in areas designated and posted specifically
for such use;
   (F)   Leave any garbage, trash, cans, bottles, papers or other refuse
elsewhere than in the receptacle provided therefor;
   (G)   Use or attempt to use or interfere with the use of any table, space of
facility which at the time is reserved for any other person or group which has
received a permit from the Director for the use thereof;
   (H)   Discharge or shoot any firearm, air gun, slingshot or bow and arrow
except at places designated and posted specifically for such purposes;
   (I)   Dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any tree, plant, shrub,
bloom or flower, or any portion thereof, except a duly authorized city employee
in the performance of his or her duty;
   (J)   Remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel from any park
except a duly authorized city employee in the performance of his or her duty;
   (K)   Cut, break, deface or disturb any rock, building, cage, pen, monument,
sign, fence, structure, apparatus, equipment or property except a duly
authorized city employee in the performance of his or her duty;
   (L)   Light or maintain any fire unless such fire is lighted and maintained
only in a stove or fire circle or place provided for such purpose;
   (M)   Throw rocks and waste matter in unauthorized places;
   (N)   Bathe or wade in or otherwise pollute the waters of any pond, stream,
lake or pool unless wading or bathing are allowed in designated streams or
pools or portions thereof;
   (O)   Frighten, chase, set snare for, catch, injure or destroy any wild
quadrupeds or birds; or destroy, remove or disturb any of the young or eggs of
the same; or to injure or maltreat any domestic or other animals;
   (P)   Camp, lodge or tarry overnight unless there are set aside certain
places for this purpose; the provisions of §
12.68.020 regulating loitering and tarrying in any public park is adopted by
reference;
   (Q)   Indulge in riotous, boisterous or indecent conduct; and no noisy,
disorderly or offensive person shall be allowed within the park; the provisions
of Chapter 9.32 prohibiting any person from drinking alcoholic beverages in a
public place is adopted by reference;
   (R)   Roller skate or bicycle upon tennis courts in any public park within
the city;
   (S)   Enter any toilet facility designated for the use of female persons
within any public park or go into the vault of or be within such toilet
facility, excepting therefrom females, boys under the age of six years and park
employees while acting within the scope of their duties of cleaning or
repairing the toilets; or cut, deface or make any writing or marking on the
walls of any toilet facility or structure within any public park;
   (T)   (1)   Skateboard or inline skate at a city owned skateboard park
without wearing a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads;
       (2)   Use this facility for skateboarding or inline skating if under the
age of 14 years without being supervised by an adult;
      (3)   Use any other equipment other than skateboards or inline skates at
this facility;
      (4)   Skateboard or inline skate during rain or wet conditions at this
facility; and/or
      (5)   If not an adult supervising someone under the age of 14 years,
enter (by passing through the entrance/fence) or remain in the skateboard park
while not actively skating at all times.
   (U)   To smoke or engage in the act of smoking in any public park in
violation of §
8.73.050.
(Ord. 3326, passed 1-3-1973; Ord. 3643, passed 5-25-1977; Ord. MC-460, passed
5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1170, passed 3-18-2004; Ord. MC-1171, passed 4-6-2004; Ord.
MC-1180, passed 9-9-2004; Ord. MC-1319, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 12.80.140 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating or causing the violation of any
provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction
thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 3326, passed 1-3-1973; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 12.84: OFF-STREET PUBLIC PARKING
Section
Article I. General Provisions
   
12.84.010   Citation
   
12.84.020   Findings and general statement
   
12.84.030   Chapter not exclusive
   
12.84.040   Initiation of proceedings
   
12.84.050   Determination that public convenience and necessity require
improvements and acquisitions
   
12.84.060   Preliminary determination of necessity
   
12.84.070   Notice of hearing
   
12.84.080   Objections
   
12.84.090   Final determination of necessity
   
12.84.100   Modification
   
12.84.110   Council findings and determinations are final and conclusive
   
12.84.120   Applicability of findings
   
12.84.130   Proceedings undertaken without compliance with investigation -
finality of order of Mayor and City Council
   
12.84.140   General provisions
   
12.84.150   City may take action without petition
   
12.84.160   Resolution setting forth majority protest
   
12.84.170   Parking places not necessarily in parking district
   
12.84.180   No specific time limit between acts
   
12.84.190   Publication of notice
   
12.84.200   Use of resolution
   
12.84.210   Assessment upon public property
   
12.84.220   When bonds may be issued
   
12.84.230   Payment of bonds
   
12.84.240   Registration and redemption of bonds
   
12.84.250   Issuance of bonds in different divisions
   
12.84.260   Bids for bonds - sale to highest responsible bidder - rejection of
bids - re-advertisement - private sale - use of proceeds
   
12.84.270   Bonds - additional sources of payment
   
12.84.280   Rental of facilities
   
12.84.290   Incidental use
   
12.84.300   Disposition of property
   
12.84.310   Other procedures
   
12.84.320   Assessment without bonds
Article II. Procedural Alternative I
   
12.84.330   Generally
   
12.84.340   Two parking districts
   
12.84.350   Administration
   
12.84.360   Additional collection provision
   
12.84.370   Tax levy
Article III. Procedural Alternative II
   
12.84.380   Generally
   
12.84.390   Findings of majority protest
   
12.84.400   Maturity of bonds
   
12.84.410   Annual assessments
   
12.84.420   Enlargement of district
   
12.84.430   Additional parking place pledge
   
12.84.440   Mayor and City Council as Parking Place Commission
   
12.84.450   Provision for residential property
Article IV. Procedural Alternative III
   
12.84.460   Generally
   
12.84.470   Contents of resolution - intention to form district
   
12.84.480   Resolution - purpose of debt - amount - property taxable to pay
debt
   
12.84.490   Division of district into zones
   
12.84.500   Resolution - description of improvement map of district -
availability for inspection
   
12.84.510   Resolution - time and place of hearing - who may be heard
   
12.84.520   Notice of hearing - publication - posting - mailing
   
12.84.530   Hearing - time and place - who may appear - continuance
   
12.84.540   Change in purpose of bond and amount
   
12.84.550   Notice of intention to make change - publication - posting -
contents
   
12.84.560   Hearing on change - who may appear - continuance
   
12.84.570   Protests by holders of title to one-half of value of taxable
property - resolution of necessity to incur debt - contents
   
12.84.580   Disapproval of formation resolution for determination of no benefit
   
12.84.590   Effective date of improvement district - effect of determinations
in resolution
   
12.84.600   Effect of formation on bond proceedings and tax levy
   
12.84.610   Issuance of bonds by resolution
   
12.84.620   Series of bonds - different maturity dates - maximum term of series
   
12.84.630   Form of bonds and coupons - time of principal payments
   
12.84.640   Interest rate - payment dates
   
12.84.650   Call and redemption before maturity - provision in bond
   
12.84.660   Denomination
   
12.84.670   Place of payment
   
12.84.680   Form of bonds - date - number - signing and countersigning - seal -
mechanical reproduction of signatures
   
12.84.690   Bonds of improvement districts - statement of limitation on levy
   
12.84.700   Payment of proceeds into City Treasury - special improvement funds
- expenditure for purpose of debt - application of surplus on accomplishment of
purpose
   
12.84.710   Interest paid from bond proceeds - maximum limitation
   
12.84.720   Bonds - payment of principal and interest
   
12.84.730   Annual assessments
   
12.84.740   Exemption of residential property
Article V. Procedural Alternative IV
   
12.84.750   Generally
   
12.84.760   Issuance of bonds
   
12.84.770   Remedies for collection
Article VI. Procedural Alternative V
   
12.84.780   Generally
   
12.84.790   Issuance of bonds
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 12.84.010 CITATION.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter may be cited as the “San Bernardino
Off-Street Public Parking Improvement and Finance, Procedural Ordinance”
(sometimes referred to as “Off-Street Parking Ordinance”).
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.020 FINDINGS AND GENERAL STATEMENT.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council find that, in order to provide an orderly
procedure for the acquisition, construction, improvement, completion, repair,
management, reconstruction, administration, maintenance, operation and disposal
of public off-street parking places, issuance and payment of bonds to pay the
cost thereof; the making of contributions therefor; and the making of covenants
and agreements with the bond holders for the security and payment of such
bonds, it is necessary for the city to exercise the powers it has by virtue of
being a home rule city and to provide such a procedure. As used in this
chapter, PARKING PLACES includes public parking lots, garages, buildings and
other improvements for the parking of motor vehicles. The procedure provided
for in this chapter is to be an alternative to any others provided by, under or
pursuant to the City Charter or the general laws of the state.
   (B)   In addition to matters specified elsewhere in this chapter, the city
is authorized to perform the acts authorized by the procedural alternatives,
including, without limitation, the following:
      (1)   Acquire, by condemnation, purchase, gift, lease or any other means,
property necessary or convenient for use as parking places, including any
property necessary or convenient for the opening, widening, straightening or
extending of streets or alleys necessary or convenient for ingress to or egress
from any parking place;
      (2)   Improve any property by the construction thereon of garages,
buildings or other improvements necessary or convenient for parking purposes;
      (3)   Improve parking places and any property necessary or convenient for
ingress to or egress from parking places;
      (4)   Administer, maintain, operate and repair parking places or provide
therefor;
      (5)   Collect fees or charges to pay all or any part of the cost of
improving, repairing, maintaining and operating parking places and of acquiring
and improving additional parking places;
      (6)   Levy taxes to pay all or any part of the cost of improving,
repairing, maintaining and operating parking places and of acquiring and
improving additional parking places;
      (7)   Employ engineers, attorneys and other persons necessary or
convenient for the doing of any act authorized by this chapter; and
      (8)   Do all acts and things necessary or convenient for the
accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.030 CHAPTER NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   This chapter is not exclusive. The Mayor and City Council shall have the
power to provide other procedures or to follow parking place or district
procedures now or hereafter provided by general law; provided, however, that
whenever the city is acting pursuant to this chapter, the provisions of this
chapter shall be controlling to the extent that they are in conflict with any
of the provisions of said laws.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.040 INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS.
   Whenever the Mayor and City Council deem it necessary to provide public off-
street parking places under and pursuant to this chapter, the Mayor and City
Council shall, by resolution, declare their intention to proceed and shall
describe, in general terms, the procedural alternative they intend to follow;
the proposed improvements or acquisitions involved; the estimated costs of the
improvements or acquisitions involved; and the maximum amount of bonds, if any,
to be issued to finance the improvements or acquisitions. The requirement of a
resolution as provided for in this section may be satisfied by the adoption of
the resolution provided for in §§
12.84.050 through
12.84.130.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.050 DETERMINATION THAT PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY REQUIRE
IMPROVEMENTS AND ACQUISITIONS.
   Before ordering any acquisitions or improvements or both, or the creation of
any district pursuant to this chapter, where the costs of the acquisitions or
improvements are to be paid in whole or in part by special assessment or other
special assessment taxes upon property, whether the special assessment will be
specific or a special assessment tax upon property wholly or partially
according to the assessed value of such property, the Mayor and City Council
shall find that the public convenience and necessity require such acquisitions
or improvements or both, in the manner provided in § 19, Article XVI of the
California Constitution.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.060 PRELIMINARY DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY.
   A resolution of preliminary determination shall be adopted, describing, in
general terms, the intention to proceed under this chapter, the procedural
alternative to be followed; the proposed improvements or acquisitions involved;
the estimated costs of such improvements or acquisitions; whether the
assessment is to be levied on all real property or on land only; the amount,
based upon the estimated costs, to be assessed against each particular parcel;
the maximum amount of bonds, if any, to be issued to finance the proposed
improvements or acquisitions. The resolution shall also state that any person
interested may file a protest in writing with the City Clerk containing therein
a description of the property in which the signer thereof is interested
sufficient to identify the same and, if the signers are not shown on the last
equalized assessment roll as the owners of such property, must contain or be
accompanied by written evidence that such signers are the owners of such
property. The resolution shall also set a time and place when and where any and
all persons interested may appear and show cause, if they have any, why the
Mayor and City Council should not find and determine that the public
convenience and necessity require the formation of the proposed improvement
district and the proposed acquisitions or improvements without compliance with
the Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of
1931, sometimes referred to in this chapter as “Investigation Act.”
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of
1931, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, Division 4, §§ 2800 et seq.
§ 12.84.070 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   The resolution shall contain a notice of the time and place of hearing.
Notice of the hearing shall be given by publishing a copy of the resolution of
preliminary determination once at least 15 days prior to the time fixed for the
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. Such
notice shall also be given by posting a copy of the resolution of preliminary
determination in three public places within the proposed improvement district
at least 15 days before the time fixed for the hearing. Such notice shall also
be given by mailing a copy of the resolution of intention at least 15 days
before the time fixed for the hearing to each holder of title to taxable real
property or land, as the case may be, within the proposed improvement district
as such ownership is shown on the last equalized county assessment roll. The
City Clerk shall cause all the above notices to be given.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.080 OBJECTIONS.
   At the time and place fixed for the hearing and so noticed, any person
interested may object to undertaking the proceedings without first complying
with the provisions of the Investigation Act.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of
1931, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, Division 4, §§ 2800 et seq.
§ 12.84.090 FINAL DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY.
   If no protests are made, or if the protests have been heard and overruled,
the Mayor and City Council may adopt a resolution finding and determining that
the public convenience and necessity require the proposed improvements and/or
acquisitions, and that the Investigation Act shall not apply. The finding may
be incorporated in the resolution ordering the improvement and/or acquisition.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of
1931, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, Division 4, §§ 2800 et seq.
§ 12.84.100 MODIFICATION.
   When proceedings are had for a change and modification, the resolution of
preliminary determination to change and modify shall be deemed a resolution of
preliminary determination and the resolution ordering the change and
modifications shall be deemed a resolution determining the convenience and
necessity as to the changes and modifications.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.110 COUNCIL FINDINGS AND DETERMINATIONS ARE FINAL AND CONCLUSIVE.
   The resolution determining the convenience and necessity shall be adopted by
the affirmative vote of four-fifths of the members of the City Council and its
findings and determinations shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.120 APPLICABILITY OF FINDINGS.
   Sections
12.84.050 through
12.84.130 shall not apply when investigation proceedings have been avoided or
taken pursuant to the Investigation Act.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of
1931, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, Division 4, §§ 2800 et seq.
§ 12.84.130 PROCEEDINGS UNDERTAKEN WITHOUT COMPLIANCE WITH INVESTIGATION -
FINALITY OF ORDER OF MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL.
   Where proceedings for any improvements and/or acquisitions or any part
thereof have been undertaken without compliance with the Investigation Act or
without proceedings under §§
12.84.050 through
12.84.130, proceedings may thereafter be had under §§
12.84.050 through
12.84.130, with reference thereto, and the order of the Mayor and City Council
determining convenience and necessity therein shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of
1931, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, Division 4, §§ 2800 et seq.
§ 12.84.140 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The general provisions set forth in §§
12.84.150 through
12.84.320 shall apply to all proceedings taken under this chapter.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.150 CITY MAY TAKE ACTION WITHOUT PETITION.
   The city may prepare a report, adopt a resolution of intention, form a
parking district or take any other action to provide public off-street parking
places without any petition therefor.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.160 RESOLUTION SETTING FORTH MAJORITY PROTEST.
   The Mayor and City Council, in their discretion, may set forth in a
resolution the basis for determining the existence of a majority protest, which
may include, but shall not be limited to, land area, assessed valuation of real
property, assessed valuation of land only or the number of property owners.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.170 PARKING PLACES NOT NECESSARILY IN PARKING DISTRICT.
   When a parking district is formed, it shall not be necessary for all parking
places to be located within the parking district.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.180 NO SPECIFIC TIME LIMIT BETWEEN ACTS.
   It shall not be necessary for any specified time to elapse between the
performance of acts except as otherwise required by this chapter.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.190 PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.
   The first publication and the mailing of any resolution or notice shall be
not later than 15 days before the day fixed therein for hearing or other act.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.200 USE OF RESOLUTION.
   The Mayor and City Council may act, by resolution, where an ordinance is
provided except as provided in §§
12.84.710 and
12.84.720.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.210 ASSESSMENT UPON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Whenever proceedings are to be undertaken in accordance with Procedural
Alternatives I, II or III, the Mayor and City Council may provide, in the
resolution of intention, that any real property belonging to any county, city,
public agency, school board, educational, penal or reform institution or
institution for those with psychotic disorders or mental disorders shall be
assessed in accordance with the provisions of the Cal. Streets and Highways
Code, §§ 5300 through 5325, inclusive, as the same now appear or are hereafter
amended.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.220 WHEN BONDS MAY BE ISSUED.
   Bonds may be issued at such time or times as the Mayor and City Council, in
their discretion, by resolution, determine, including, but not limited to,
before contracting or obtaining options for the purchase of land, property or
rights-of-way to be acquired, or obtaining a judgment in eminent domain for the
acquisition thereof.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976; Ord. 3603, passed 9-20-1976)
§ 12.84.230 PAYMENT OF BONDS.
   Any bonds issued in accordance with Procedural Alternatives I, II or III,
the interest thereon and premium, if any, shall be payable from assessments
levied, as determined by the Mayor and City Council, upon land only or upon all
real property within the district. The resolution of intention shall state the
basis upon which the assessment is to be levied.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976; Ord. 3603, passed 9-20-1976)
§ 12.84.240 REGISTRATION AND REDEMPTION OF BONDS.
   The Mayor and City Council shall, by resolution, prescribe the form of the
bonds and of the coupons attached thereto, the conversion and registration
privileges carried by the bonds and fix the time when the whole or any part of
the principal shall become due and payable. The Mayor and City Council may
provide for the call and redemption of bonds prior to maturity at such times
and prices and upon such other terms as they may specify. A bond shall not be
subject to call or redemption prior to maturity unless it contains a recital to
that effect.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.250 ISSUANCE OF BONDS IN DIFFERENT DIVISIONS.
   The bonds may be issued in different divisions with different dates and
dates of maturity.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.260 BIDS FOR BONDS - SALE TO HIGHEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER - REJECTION OF
BIDS - RE-ADVERTISEMENT - PRIVATE SALE - USE OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   The bonds shall be sold for such price or prices as the Mayor and
Council, in their discretion, shall determine which may be at the par value
thereof with or without premium or discount. The bonds may be sold at public or
private sale as the Mayor and City Council shall determine. If the Mayor and
City Council determine to sell the bonds by private sale, the same shall be
awarded, by resolution, to the buyer or buyers thereof. If the Mayor and City
Council determine to sell the bonds at public sale, before selling the bonds or
any part thereof, the City Clerk shall give notice inviting sealed bids in such
manner as the Mayor and City Council shall prescribe. If satisfactory bids are
received, the bonds offered for sale shall be awarded, by resolution, to the
highest responsible bidder. If no bids are received, or if the Mayor and City
Council determine that the bids received are not satisfactory as to price or
responsibility of the bidders, they may reject all bids received, if any, and
either re-advertise or sell the bonds at private sale.
   (B)   The purposes for which the proceeds of the bonds may be used may also
include, without limitation, incidental expenses, such as engineering,
appraisal, legal fees, bond counsel fees, financial consultant fees, land and
rights-of-way acquisition, reserve funds and expenses of financing the
district, if any, and expenses of all proceedings for the authorization,
issuance and sale of the bonds or related thereto.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.270 BONDS - ADDITIONAL SOURCES OF PAYMENT.
   The Mayor and City Council, in their sole discretion, may provide, in the
resolution required by §§
12.84.040 or
12.84.050 through
12.84.130, that bonds, both principal and interest, issued for the purposes
provided for herein may be additionally payable from any legally available
source of funds, including, without limitation, revenues derived from the
operation of the public off-street parking places or grants from other
governmental agencies to the city to be used for any of the purposes set forth
herein.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.280 RENTAL OF FACILITIES.
   The city may acquire, construct, rent, lease, maintain, repair, manage and
operate all or any portion of any real and personal property for the purpose of
providing public off-street parking places and may provide by lease or
otherwise with any person, firm, corporation or non-profit association or
corporation for the management, operation, maintenance or repair of the public
off-street parking places.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.290 INCIDENTAL USE.
   (A)   As an incident to the operation of any parking facility, the city may
devote a portion of its property to uses such as retail stores, bus terminal,
gasoline service station, helicopter landing area or any other commercial use,
when, in its judgment, it is convenient or necessary to conduct or permit such
use in order to utilize the property as a parking facility. Any such incidental
use shall be secondary to the primary use as a parking facility, and the
portion of the land devoted to the incidental use shall not exceed 25% of the
surface area of the property. If a building is erected on the property for the
purpose of parking motor vehicles, the incidental use of the building shall not
occupy more than 25% of the floor area.
   (B)   The Mayor and City Council shall use its best efforts to lease surplus
space devoted to commercial purposes other than parking vehicles to any person,
firm, corporation or non-profit association or corporation as the Mayor and
City Council shall determine.
   (C)   As an incidental use to a parking facility, foundations, platforms and
other like structural forms may be constructed in any feasible manner, as an
integral part thereof or otherwise, for provision or utilization of air rights
sites for buildings to be used for, without limitation, residential, commercial
or other uses; provided that the cost of such structural forms shall be
recovered from the parties utilizing such air rights sites and used, as
determined by the Mayor and City Council, to pay the costs of acquisition,
construction, improvement, completion, repair, management, reconstruction,
administration, maintenance or operation of the parking places involved or
other parking places located within the city.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.300 DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY.
   The Mayor and City Council, subject to the provisions of the City Charter,
may determine that any parcel of property, or any improvements, extensions or
replacements thereof or additions thereto, either acquired from the proceeds of
the bonds or leased to the city with rents therefor derived from assessments
levied pursuant to this chapter are no longer needed for off-street parking
purposes or such facilities may be otherwise better provided. Subject to the
provisions of the City Charter, and any restriction in the resolution providing
for the issuance of any outstanding bonds relating to the facilities involved,
the property may thereafter be sold, leased or otherwise disposed of, either
during or after the term of the bonds and the proceeds placed in a fund as
designated by the Mayor and City Council and used for the purposes of this
chapter.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976; Ord. 3759, passed 9-13-1978)
§ 12.84.310 OTHER PROCEDURES.
   When proceedings are had under this chapter, its provisions may be
supplemented by other proceedings or as otherwise provided in the resolution of
intention, including, without limitation, provisions for credit for parking
places made available for public or private uses pursuant to agreement with the
city, credit for taxes or assessments paid to the city and used primarily for
parking purposes, and the replenishment for Reserve Funds.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976; Ord. 3603, passed 9-20-1976)
§ 12.84.320 ASSESSMENT WITHOUT BONDS.
   In addition, or as an alternative to, the other provisions contained in
Procedural Alternatives II or III, the Mayor and City Council may provide in
the resolution of intention for the levy each year of an ad valorem assessment
on all taxable real property or all taxable land, as the case may be, within
the district to provide monies for all or any part of the costs and expenses of
providing parking places prior to the issuance of bonds or without issuing
bonds. The costs and expenses of providing parking places may include, but
shall not be limited to, lease payments, the costs and expenses of operating,
maintaining, repairing and improving the parking places, engineering fees,
appraisal fees, legal fees, financial consultant fees, cost of land and rights-
of-way acquisition, expenses of all proceedings for the formation of the
district and all other costs and expenses for carrying out the purposes of this
chapter. The rate of ad valorem assessment shall be fixed by the Mayor and City
Council each year so as to produce sums required to pay the estimated costs and
expenses mentioned above. The assessment shall be levied, collected and
enforced in the same manner, at the same time and with the same penalties and
interest, as in the case of taxes levied for the city.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976; Ord. 3603, passed 9-20-1976)
ARTICLE II. PROCEDURAL ALTERNATIVE I
§ 12.84.330 GENERALLY.
   Any part or parts of the city may be created and operated as a district or
districts for the acquisition, construction, improvement, completion, repair,
management, reconstruction, administration, maintenance, operation and disposal
of public off-street parking places; bonds to pay the cost thereof may be
issued and paid; contributions may be made, covenants and agreements with the
bondholders for the security and payment of such bonds may be made; and the
Mayor and City Council shall have the powers, jurisdiction and authority all as
now or hereafter provided in the Parking District Law of 1943 (herein called
“1943 Act”), except as herein otherwise provided.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Parking District Law of 1943, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, Division
18, Part 1(commencing with § 31500)
§ 12.84.340 TWO PARKING DISTRICTS.
   Territory included in one parking district may be included in another
parking district if the Mayor and City Council find that the territory will be
benefitted by being included in the subsequent parking district.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.350 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Mayor and City Council, in their discretion, may, by the adoption of a
resolution, declare themselves to be the Parking Place Commission, with any and
all powers and duties of Parking Place Commissioners as provided in the 1943
Act.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Parking District Law of 1943, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, Division
18, Part 1 (commencing with § 31500)
§ 12.84.360 ADDITIONAL COLLECTION PROVISION.
   The provisions of the Cal. Streets and Highways Code, §§ 8680 to 8688,
inclusive, and §§ 8830 to 8837, inclusive, shall apply to assessments levied
hereunder.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.370 TAX LEVY.
   Annually on or before June 30, the Mayor and City Council shall prepare an
estimate of the expenditures required for the maintenance, operation, repair
and improvement of the parking places under its charge for the ensuing fiscal
year, and, in their discretion, required during that year for the acquisition
of additional parking places, if any. The Mayor and City Council shall also
estimate the amount, if any, of revenues to be derived from rentals, fees or
charges for the use of the parking places and the amount, if any, to be raised
by taxation. The amount to be raised by taxation for the acquisition of
additional parking places shall be stated separately. At the time and in the
manner for levying general taxes, the Mayor and City Council may levy and
collect upon and against all of the taxable real property or land only, as the
case may be, within the district at the rate determined by the Mayor and City
Council, a special ad valorem tax sufficient to raise the sum of money
estimated as required to be raised by taxation.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
ARTICLE III. PROCEDURAL ALTERNATIVE II
§ 12.84.380 GENERALLY.
   Any part or parts of the city may be created and operated as a district or
districts for the acquisition, construction, improvement, completion, repair,
management, reconstruction, administration, maintenance, operation and disposal
of public off-street parking places; bonds to pay the cost thereof may be
issued and paid; revenues from on- and off-street parking facilities may be
allocated and pledged; annual ad valorem assessments may be levied and
collected; contributions may be made; covenants and agreements with the
bondholders for the security and payment of such bonds may be made; and the
Mayor and City Council shall have the powers, jurisdiction and authority all as
now or hereafter provided in the Parking District Law of 1951 (herein called
“1951 Act”), except as herein otherwise provided.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Parking District Law of 1951, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, §§ 35100
et seq.
§ 12.84.390 FINDINGS OF MAJORITY PROTEST.
   If the owners of taxable real property or taxable land, as the case may be,
in the district having an assessed valuation of more than one-half of the
assessed valuation of all taxable real property or all taxable land, as the
case may be, in the district at the conclusion of the hearing have on file and
have not withdrawn their written protests objecting to the formation of the
district, the legislative body shall find that a majority protest has been
filed, and no further proceedings shall be taken for a period of one year from
the date of the decision of the Mayor and City Council on the hearing unless
the protests are overruled by an affirmative vote of four-fifths of the members
of the City Council in which event the proceedings may continue as if no
majority protest had been made. Any person making a protest may withdraw the
protest, in writing, at any time prior to the conclusion of the protest
hearing.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.400 MATURITY OF BONDS.
   The full amount of the bonds may be divided into two or more series and
different dates fixed for the bonds of each series. The maximum term which the
bonds of any series shall run before maturity shall not exceed 40 years from
the date of the series.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.410 ANNUAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The annual assessment provided for in the 1951 Act shall be computed on the
basis of the formula set forth in the resolution of intention to form the
district as originally adopted or as modified by subsequent change and
modification or other proceedings conducted pursuant to this chapter or any
other law, and the limitations upon the rate or period thereof provided in the
Act shall not apply. If the assessed value of any parcel of property does not
appear on the tax roll, an estimated assessed value of such parcel shall be
made by the Director of Development Services in consultation with the County
Assessor, and such estimate shall, for purposes of such ad valorem assessment,
be considered the assessed value of such parcel.
   (A)   Supplemental advances and levies. The provisions of the Cal. Streets
and Highways Code, §§ 8800 to 8809, inclusive, shall apply to assessments
levied hereunder if so stated in the resolution of intention.
   (B)   Additional collection provisions. The provisions of the Cal. Streets
and Highways Code, §§ 8680 to 8688, inclusive, and §§ 8830 to 8837, inclusive,
shall apply to assessments levied hereunder.
   (C)   Charges.
      (1)   The Mayor and City Council, or the City Parking Commission, as the
case may be, may, by resolution, prescribe, revise and collect fees, tolls,
rates, rentals and other charges (other than special assessments), including,
but not necessarily limited to, service charges and standby charges for
services or facilities furnished by the district; charges for the availability
of the facilities of the district, regardless of whether the facilities are
used or not; and minimum charges. Such charges shall be payable on a uniform
and equitable basis by the owner of the property to which the facilities of the
district are available, including the owners of publicly owned property.
      (2)   Any delinquent charges and all penalties thereon when recorded as
hereinafter provided shall constitute a lien on the real property to which the
facilities of the district are available (except that no such lien shall be
created against any publicly owned property), and such lien shall continue
until the charge and all penalties thereon are fully paid or the property sold
therefor.
      (3)   All remedies provided for collection of due and unpaid charges
which are provided in the Revenue Bond Law of 1941 of the state may be
exercised to enforce payment of any charges levied under this article.
      (4)   A resolution prescribing or revising such charges shall not be
adopted until the Mayor and City Council or the Commission, as the case may be,
has given notice of and held a hearing thereon substantially as provided in
Cal. Gov’t Code, § 54354.5, being part of the Revenue Bond Law of 1941.
      (5)   Any assessment levied against any parcel of real property pursuant
to this article which is held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid or unenforceable for any reason shall be deemed to be a charge under
this article, and the amounts of any assessments levied and collected against
other parcels in the district and not affected by said holding of invalidity
shall be credited against any charges which might otherwise be payable by the
owners thereof, to the end that no parcel in the district is charged both an
assessment and a charge for the same facility. Any change and modification or
other proceeding conducted for the purpose of levying assessments under this
article shall comply with the notice and hearing requirement of Cal. Gov’t
Code, § 54354.5.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Parking District Law of 1951, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, §§ 35100
et seq.
   Revenue Bond Law of 1941, see Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 54300 et seq.
§ 12.84.420 ENLARGEMENT OF DISTRICT.
   The boundaries of the district heretofore or hereafter formed may be
enlarged from time to time.
   (A)   Resolution of intention. The territory to be annexed shall be set
forth in a resolution of preliminary determination and of intention to be
adopted by the Mayor and City Council which shall give notice that the matter
and all persons interested will be heard by the Mayor and City Council at a
time to be stated therein.
   (B)   Publication. The resolution shall be published twice in a newspaper of
general circulation published in the city and posted as provided in §
12.84.070.
   (C)   Hearing. The hearing may be adjourned, from time to time. At the
hearing, the Mayor and City Council shall have the power to determine whether
or not the entire territory, or only a portion thereof, to be annexed and the
district will be benefitted by the annexation.
   (D)   Order. The Mayor and City Council shall, by resolution, order the
annexation of such territory, defining its boundaries therein. Its decision
thereon shall be final and conclusive.
   (E)   Ad valorem assessment. Thereafter, the property annexed shall be
subject to special levies for maintenance and operation and for any bonds
issued for the acquisition for construction of improvements, the same as are
the properties already in the parking district.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.430 ADDITIONAL PARKING PLACE PLEDGE.
   The Mayor and City Council may, at any time, pledge revenues from off-street
parking places heretofore or hereafter acquired in other than the proceedings
provided for herein in addition to those acquired in the proceedings.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.440 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL AS PARKING PLACE COMMISSION.
   The Mayor and City Council, in their discretion, may, by the adoption of a
resolution, declare themselves to be the Parking Place Commission with any and
all powers and duties of Parking Place Commissioners as provided for in the
1951 Act.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Parking District Law of 1951, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, §§ 35100
et seq.
§ 12.84.450 PROVISION FOR RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Should there be included in the district property used for residential
purposes, including in said term single-family and multiple-unit residential
property, regardless of the zoning applicable thereto, the same shall be exempt
from the assessments levied hereunder, so long as such property is lawfully
used for residential purposes, upon a finding by the Mayor and City Council
that:
      (1)   Such property is lawfully used for residential purposes; and
      (2)   Such property has adequate off-street parking for the residential
uses involved.
   (B)   Each year, at the time of levying the assessment as provided in this
chapter, such findings shall be reviewed, to the end that such exempt property
will no longer be exempt and will be assessed:
      (1)   When the use is changed from the exempt residential use; and/or
      (2)   When the property, although still devoted to the same use, no
longer has adequate off-street parking.
   (C)   Should a particular parcel of real property have another use, in
addition to the residential use, only the proportionate value thereof
attributable to the residential use shall be exempt.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
ARTICLE IV. PROCEDURAL ALTERNATIVE III
§ 12.84.460 GENERALLY.
   Whenever the Mayor and City Council deem it necessary to form an improvement
district within the city and to issue bonds which shall be special obligations
of and be issued on behalf of such improvement district, for the acquisition,
construction, improvement, completion, repair, management, reconstruction,
administration, maintenance, operation, disposal or financing of any or all
works, improvements and facilities referred to in this chapter, they shall, by
resolution, so declare the intention to form an improvement district and to
issue such bonds.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.470 CONTENTS OF RESOLUTION - INTENTION TO FORM DISTRICT.
   The resolution of intention shall state that the Mayor and City Council
intend to form an improvement district of any portion of the city, which, in
the opinion of the Mayor and City Council, will be benefitted by the
acquisition and construction of certain improvements and to incur bonded
indebtedness by the issuance of bonds on behalf of such improvement district.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.480 RESOLUTION - PURPOSE OF DEBT - AMOUNT - PROPERTY TAXABLE TO PAY
DEBT.
   The resolution of intention shall also state:
   (A)   The purposes for which the proposed bonds are to be issued which may
include any or all of the purposes stated in this chapter;
   (B)   The estimated cost of the accomplishment of such purposes and the
amount of bonds to be issued therefor, which may include incidental expenses,
including, without limitation, engineering, appraisal, legal fees, bond counsel
fees, financing consultant fees, land and rights-of-way acquisition, reserve
funds and expenses of financing the district and expenses of all proceedings
for the authorization, issuance and sale of the bonds or related thereto;
   (C)   That the bonds shall not be general obligations of the city, nor shall
the credit of the city or the property or revenue of any public utility owned
by the city be pledged for the payment thereof; and that the bonds shall be
special obligations of and be issued on behalf of the improvement district; and
whether ad valorem assessments for the payment of the interest on the bonds and
the principal thereof shall be levied upon the taxable real property or upon
land only in the improvement district; and
   (D)   The maximum interest rate which the bonds may bear, payable semi-
annually, except that interest for the first year may be payable at the end of
that year or at such time prior to the end of that year as may be determined in
the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.490 DIVISION OF DISTRICT INTO ZONES.
   If, in the judgment of the Mayor and City Council, varying benefits will be
derived by the different parcels of real property lying within the improvement
district, the district may be divided into zones according to benefits.
   (A)   Number. The district may be divided into as many zones, up to the
total number of parcels of real property in the district as may be deemed
necessary, and each zone shall be composed of and include all the real property
within the district which will be benefitted in like manner.
   (B)   Percentage.
      (1)   The Mayor and City Council shall also determine the percentage of
the sum to be raised each year by the levy and collection of the special
assessment taxes in the district for the payments on the principal and interest
of the bonds, which will be raised from the real property or land only, as the
case may be, in each zone.
      (2)   As an alternative, the Mayor and City Council may determine the
percentage of assessed valuation of taxable real property or land only, as the
case may be, within each zone which shall be used in computing the annual rate
of ad valorem assessment within the district and to which the annual rate shall
be applied.
   (C)   Resolution of intention. When the district is divided into such zones,
the resolution of intention shall so state, giving the percentages to be raised
from the real property or land only, as the case may be, in each zone.
   (D)   Designation. Each zone shall be designated by a different letter or
number and shall be plainly shown on the map of the improvement district filed
in the office of the City Clerk and referred to in the resolution of intention,
either by separate boundaries, coloring or other convenient and graphic method,
so that all persons interested may with accuracy ascertain within which zone
any parcel of property is located.
   (E)   Plat. It shall be sufficient in all cases where the improvement
district is to be divided into such zones according to benefits if the
resolution of intention states that fact and refers to the map for the
boundaries and all details concerning the zones.
   (F)   Changes in boundaries at hearing. At the hearing, the Mayor and City
Council may eliminate, create or alter the boundaries of proposed zones in the
manner provided for the alteration of the boundaries of the proposed district.
   (G)   Subsequent changes in boundaries. If the Mayor and City Council, from
time to time, determine that the public interest will be served thereby, they
may, from time to time, add property to a zone or transfer property from a zone
of lesser benefit to a zone of greater benefit, in the manner provided for
enlarging the improvement district.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.500 RESOLUTION - DESCRIPTION OF IMPROVEMENT MAP OF DISTRICT -
AVAILABILITY FOR INSPECTION.
   The resolution of intention shall also state that such resolution, together
with a general description of the proposed improvement and a map showing the
exterior boundaries of the proposed improvement district with relation to the
territory immediately contiguous thereto and to the proposed improvement, is on
file with the City Clerk and is available for inspection by any person or
persons interested. This map shall govern for all details as to the extent of
the proposed improvement district.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.510 RESOLUTION - TIME AND PLACE OF HEARING - WHO MAY BE HEARD.
   The resolution of intention shall also state:
   (A)   The time and place for a hearing by the Mayor and City Council on the
questions of the formation and extent of the proposed improvement district, the
proposed improvement, the estimated cost and the amount of bonds to be issued;
and
   (B)   That at the time and place specified in the resolution any person
interested will be heard; and that any holder of title to taxable real property
or land only, as the case may be, within the proposed improvement district may
file with the City Clerk at any time prior to the time set for the hearing
thereon written protest to the formation of the proposed improvement district.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.520 NOTICE OF HEARING - PUBLICATION - POSTING - MAILING.
   Notice of the hearing shall be given by publishing a copy of the resolution
of intention once at least ten days prior to the time fixed for the hearing in
a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. Such notice shall
also be given by posting a copy of the resolution of intention in three public
places within the proposed improvement district at least 15 days before the
time fixed for the hearing. Such notice shall also be given by mailing a copy
of the resolution of intention at least 15 days before the time fixed for the
hearing to each holder of title to taxable real property within the proposed
improvement district as such ownership is shown on the last equalized county
assessment roll. The City Clerk shall cause all the above notices to be given.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.530 HEARING - TIME AND PLACE - WHO MAY APPEAR - CONTINUANCE.
   At the time and place fixed in the resolution of intention, the Mayor and
City Council shall proceed with the hearing. At the hearing, any person
interested may appear and present any matters material to the questions set
forth in the resolution of intention. The Mayor and City Council shall hear and
pass upon all written protests filed by the holders of title to taxable real
property or land, as the case may be, within the proposed improvement district.
Such protests must be in writing, must contain a description of the property in
which each signer thereof is interested, sufficient to identify the same and,
if the signers are not shown on the last equalized assessment roll as the
owners of such property, must contain or be accompanied by written evidence
that such signers are the owners of such property. The hearing may be
continued, from time to time, by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.540 CHANGE IN PURPOSE OF BOND AND AMOUNT.
   The Mayor and City Council may change the purposes for which the proposed
bonds are to be issued, the estimated cost or the amount of the bonds. The
Mayor and City Council may also change the boundaries of the proposed
improvement district, but not so as to include any territory which will not, in
their judgment, be benefitted by the proposed improvement.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.550 NOTICE OF INTENTION TO MAKE CHANGE - PUBLICATION - POSTING -
CONTENTS.
   The purposes, estimated cost or amount of bonds to be issued or the
boundaries of the proposed improvement district shall not be changed by the
Mayor and City Council, except after adoption by the Mayor and City Council of
a resolution declaring their intention to order changes and fixing a time and
place for a hearing on the changes. The resolution shall be published, posted
and mailed in the same manner as set forth in §
12.84.480 for the original resolution of intention. The resolution shall state
the purposes, estimated cost and debt as originally proposed, and as changed if
such is the case, and that the exterior boundaries as originally proposed, and
as changed, if such is the case, are set forth on maps on file with the City
Clerk and that the map showing the boundaries as changed shall govern for all
details as to the extent of the proposed improvement district.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.560 HEARING ON CHANGE - WHO MAY APPEAR - CONTINUANCE.
   At the time and place fixed in the resolution of intention to make changes,
the Mayor and City Council shall proceed with the hearing. At the hearing, any
person interested may appear and present any matters material to the matters
contained in the resolution. Written protests to the proposed changes may be
filed with the City Clerk by the holder of title to taxable real property or
land, as the case may be, within the proposed improvement district at any time
up to the hour set for hearing on the proposed changes in the same manner as
set forth in §
12.84.480 for the original resolution of intention. The hearing may be
continued, from time to time, by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.570 PROTESTS BY HOLDERS OF TITLE TO ONE-HALF OF VALUE OF TAXABLE
PROPERTY - RESOLUTION OF NECESSITY TO INCUR DEBT - CONTENTS.
   (A)   If written protests are filed by the holders of title to one-half or
more of the value of the taxable real property or taxable land, as the case may
be, within the proposed improvement district, as shown by the last equalized
assessment roll of the county, prior to the hearing on the resolution of
intention or prior to the hearing on any proposed changes with respect thereto,
and, if there remain on file protests representing one-half or more of the
value of such taxable real property or taxable land, as the case may be, at the
time the Mayor and City Council have concluded the hearing on the resolution of
intention and any hearing on proposed changes with respect thereto, further
proceedings shall not be taken, and the Mayor and City Council shall declare
the proceedings abandoned unless the protests are overruled by an affirmative
vote of four-fifths of the members of the City Council. If such protests do not
remain on file at the conclusion of the hearing or hearings or if they are
overruled by a four-fifths vote of the members of the City Council, the Mayor
and City Council shall, by resolution, determine whether or not it is deemed
necessary to form the improvement district and issue bonds which shall be
special obligations of and be issued on behalf of the improvement district.
   (B)   If the Mayor and City Council determine that it is necessary to form
the improvement district and issue bonds, the resolution shall also state, in
accordance with the prior proceedings:
      (1)   The purposes for which the proposed bonds are to be issued;
      (2)   The estimated cost of the accomplishment of such purposes and the
amount of the proposed bonds;
      (3)   That the exterior boundaries of the portion of the city which will
be benefitted by the accomplishment of the purpose are set forth on a map on
file with the City Clerk, which map shall govern for all details as to the
extent of the improvement district; and
      (4)   That such portion of the city set forth on the map shall thereupon
constitute and be known by the name designated in the resolution.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.580 DISAPPROVAL OF FORMATION RESOLUTION FOR DETERMINATION OF NO
BENEFIT.
   If the Mayor and City Council find and determine that the area proposed to
constitute the improvement district will not be benefitted thereby, the Mayor
and City Council shall, by resolution, disapprove the formation.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.590 EFFECTIVE DATE OF IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT - EFFECT OF DETERMINATIONS
IN RESOLUTION.
   From and after the date the Mayor and City Council adopt the resolution
forming the improvement district, the area named therein shall constitute the
improvement district within the city bearing the name set forth in the
resolution. The determinations made in the resolution forming the improvement
district shall be final and conclusive. Any action or proceeding to attack,
review, set aside, avoid the resolution or any of the proceedings, acts or
determinations theretofore taken, done or made pursuant to this chapter shall
not be maintained by any person unless such action or proceeding is commenced
within 30 days of the adoption of such resolution. Thereafter, all persons are
barred from such action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity of such
resolution or of such proceedings, acts or determinations.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.600 EFFECT OF FORMATION ON BOND PROCEEDINGS AND TAX LEVY.
   After the formation of the improvement district pursuant to this chapter,
the Mayor and City Council may, by resolution, at such time or times as they
deem proper, issue bonds on behalf of the improvement district, and thereafter
all proceedings shall be limited and shall apply only to the improvement
district, and assessments for the payment of the bonds and the interest thereon
shall be levied upon the real property or land only, as determined in the
resolution of intention, in the improvement district.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.610 ISSUANCE OF BONDS BY RESOLUTION.
   The Mayor and City Council may, by resolution, at such time or times as they
deem proper, issue bonds which shall be special obligations of and be issued on
behalf of the improvement district for the whole or any part of the total
amount authorized, and may, from time to time, provide for the issuance of such
amounts as the necessity thereof may appear until the full amount of such bonds
authorized has been issued.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.620 SERIES OF BONDS - DIFFERENT MATURITY DATES - MAXIMUM TERM OF
SERIES.
   The full amount of the authorized bonds may be divided into two or more
series and different dates fixed for the bonds of each series. The maximum term
which the bonds of any series shall run before maturity shall not exceed 40
years from the date of the series.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.630 FORM OF BONDS AND COUPONS - TIME OF PRINCIPAL PAYMENTS.
   The Mayor and City Council shall, by resolution, prescribe the form of the
bonds and of the coupons attached thereto, the conversion and registration
privileges carried by the bonds and fix the time when the whole or any part of
the principal shall become due and payable.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.640 INTEREST RATE - PAYMENT DATES.
   The bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates not to exceed the rate
specified in the resolution of intention, payable semi-annually, except that
interest for the first year may be payable at the end of that year or at such
time prior to the end of that year as may be determined in the resolution
providing for the issuance of the bonds.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.650 CALL AND REDEMPTION BEFORE MATURITY - PROVISION IN BOND.
   The Mayor and City Council may provide for the call and redemption of bonds
prior to maturity at such times and prices and upon such other terms as they
may specify. A bond shall not be subject to call or redemption prior to
maturity unless it contains a recital to that effect.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.660 DENOMINATION.
   The denomination of the bonds shall be stated in the resolution providing
for their issuance.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.670 PLACE OF PAYMENT.
   The principal and interest on the bonds shall be payable in lawful money of
the United States at the office of the City Treasurer, or such other place or
places as may be designated, or at either place or places at the option of the
holder of the bond.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.680 FORM OF BONDS - DATE - NUMBER - SIGNING AND COUNTERSIGNING - SEAL -
MECHANICAL REPRODUCTION OF SIGNATURES.
   The bonds shall be dated, numbered consecutively, signed by the Mayor and
City Treasurer, countersigned by the City Clerk, and the official seal of the
city impressed, imprinted or reproduced thereon. The interest coupons of the
bonds shall be signed by the Treasurer. All such signatures and counter-
signatures may be printed, lithographed, or mechanically reproduced, except
that one of the signatures or counter signatures to the bonds shall be manually
affixed. Neither the Mayor, nor any members of the City Council, nor any other
officer of the city executing the bonds, are liable personally thereon by
reason of their issuance.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.690 BONDS OF IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS - STATEMENT OF LIMITATION ON LEVY.
   The bonds shall be special obligations of and be issued on behalf of the
improvement district, and shall be designated in accordance with the prior
proceedings. Each bond shall state, in substance, that the bond is not a
general obligation of the city, nor is the credit of the city or the property
or revenue of any public utility owned by the city pledged for its payment; and
that the bond is a special obligation of and is issued on behalf of the
improvement district; and that ad valorem assessments levied for the payment of
the interest thereon and principal thereof shall be levied upon the taxable
real property or land only, as the case may be, in the improvement district.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.700 PAYMENT OF PROCEEDS INTO CITY TREASURY - SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT FUNDS
- EXPENDITURE FOR PURPOSE OF DEBT - APPLICATION OF SURPLUS ON ACCOMPLISHMENT OF
PURPOSE.
   The proceeds from the sale of bonds, except for premium and accrued
interest, if any, shall be paid into the City Treasury, placed to the credit of
a Special Improvement Fund, Debt Service Fund and any Reserve Fund; all as
provided in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds and expended
only in connection with the purpose for which the indebtedness was created.
When such purpose has been accomplished, any monies remaining in the Special
Improvement Fund may be transferred to the Debt Service Fund to be used for the
payment of principal of and interest on the bonds or to any Reserve Fund
established therefor. Premium and accrued interest, if any, shall be paid into
the Treasury and placed to the credit of the fund to be used for the payment of
the principal of and interest on the bonds.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.710 INTEREST PAID FROM BOND PROCEEDS - MAXIMUM LIMITATION.
   Interest on the bonds coming due before the proceeds of a tax levied at the
next general tax levy after the sale of the bonds are available, and/or
interest on any bonds coming due before the expiration of one year following
completion of the acquisition and construction of the works and improvements
for which the bonds were issued, may be paid from the proceeds of the sale of
the bonds as may be provided in the resolution providing for the issuance of
the bonds.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.720 BONDS - PAYMENT OF PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST.
   (A)   At the time of making the general tax levy after the issuance of the
bonds, as may be provided in the resolution providing for the issuance of the
bonds, and annually thereafter until the bonds are paid or until there is a sum
in the Treasury set apart for that purpose sufficient to meet all payments of
principal and interest on the bonds as they become due, the Mayor and City
Council shall cause an assessment to be levied upon all real property or land
only, as the case may be, in the improvement district sufficient to pay the
interest on the bonds and such part of the principal as will become due before
the proceeds of such an assessment levied at the next general tax levy will be
available and to provide a contingency reserve for delinquencies. Such
assessment shall be levied and collected at the same time as other city taxes,
and shall be used only for the payment of interest on and principal of the
bonds. Assessments for the payment of such bonds shall constitute a lien on all
of the taxable real property within the improvement district. Such liens shall
be of the same force and effect as other liens for city taxes and their
collection may be enforced by the same means as provided for the enforcement of
liens for city taxes.
   (B)   Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the Mayor and City
Council from using any lawfully available funds of the city, including, without
limitation, those which are attributable to the improvement district, for
payment of such principal and interest, and to the extent that such funds are
in the treasury set apart for that purpose, the assessment required by this
article need not be levied. For purposes of this article, the phrase “funds of
the City which are attributable to the district includes without limitation,
grants from other governmental agencies to the City on” behalf of the
improvement district or venues raised by operation of the facilities
constructed under this chapter within the improvement district.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.730 ANNUAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The annual assessment provided for in this article shall be computed on the
basis of the formula set forth in the resolution of intention to form the
district as originally adopted or as modified by subsequent change and
modification or other proceedings conducted pursuant to this chapter or any
other law, and shall be, without limitation, upon the rate or period thereof.
If the assessed value of any parcel of property does not appear on the tax
roll, an estimated assessed value of such parcel shall be made by the Director
of Development Services in consultation with the County Assessor, and such
estimate shall for purposes of such ad valorem assessment be considered the
assessed value of such parcel.
   (A)   Supplemental advances and levies. The provisions of the Cal. Streets
and Highways Code, §§ 8800 to 8809, inclusive, shall apply to assessments
levied hereunder.
   (B)   Additional collection provision. The provisions of the Cal. Streets
and Highways Code, §§ 8680 to 8688, inclusive, and §§ 8830 to 8837, inclusive,
of the state shall apply to assessments levied hereunder.
   (C)   Charges. Should the Mayor and City Council determine to prescribe,
revise and collect fees, tolls, rates, rentals and other charges (other than
special assessments), including, but not necessarily limited to, service
charges and standby or maximum charges for services or facilities furnished by
the district, charges for the availability of the facilities of the district
regardless of whether the facilities are used or not, the same shall be done by
resolution. Such charges shall be payable on a uniform and equitable basis by
the owner of the property to which the facilities of the district are
available, including the owners of publicly owned property. Any delinquent
charges and all penalties thereon when recorded as hereinafter provided shall
constitute a lien on the real property to which the facilities of the district
are available (except that no such lien shall be created against any publicly
owned property), and such lien shall continue until the charge and all
penalties thereon are fully paid or the property sold therefor. All remedies
provided for collection of due and unpaid charges which are provided in the
California Revenue Bond Law of 1941 (commencing with Cal. Gov’t Code, § 54300)
may be exercised to enforce payment of such charges shall not be adopted until
the Mayor and City Council have given notice of and held a hearing thereon
substantially as provided in the Cal. Gov’t Code, § 54354.5, being part of the
Revenue Bond Law of 1941.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976; Ord. 3603, passed 9-20-1976; Ord. MC-1027, passed
9-9-1998)
§ 12.84.740 EXEMPTION OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Should there be included in the district property used for residential
purposes, including in said term single-family and multiple-unit residential
property, regardless of the zoning applicable thereto, the same shall be exempt
from the assessments levied hereunder, so long as such property is lawfully
used for residential purposes, upon a finding by the Mayor and City Council
that:
      (1)   Such property is lawfully used for residential purposes; and
      (2)   Such property has adequate off-street parking for the residential
uses involved.
   (B)   Each year, at the time of levying the assessment as provided in this
chapter, such findings shall be reviewed, to the end that such exempt property
will no longer be exempt and will be assessed:
      (1)   When the use is changed from its exempt residential use; and/or
      (2)   When the property although still devoted to the same use no longer
has adequate off-street parking.
   (C)   Should a particular parcel of real property have another use, in
addition to the residential use, only the proportionate value thereof
attributable to the residential use shall be exempt.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
ARTICLE V. PROCEDURAL ALTERNATIVE IV
§ 12.84.750 GENERALLY.
   Whenever the Mayor and City Council deem it necessary to form a parking
authority (hereinafter referred to as “authority”) to operate within the city,
the Mayor and City Council shall, by resolution, declare that there is a need
for the authority to function in the city, and the authority shall have the
powers, jurisdiction and authority all so now or hereafter provided in the
Parking Law of 1949 (hereinafter referred to as the “1949 Act”) except as
herein otherwise provided.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Parking Law of 1949, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, Part 2 (commencing
with § 32500)
§ 12.84.760 ISSUANCE OF BONDS.
   The Mayor and City Council may authorize the authority to issue revenue
bonds without first submitting the question of whether the city or the
authority, or both, shall be authorized to adopt the revenue bond method of
financing projects provided for in this section to the electors of the city.
The Mayor and City Council shall make such authorization by ordinance. The
ordinance shall describe, in general terms, the improvements or acquisitions to
be funded by the revenue bonds and the maximum amount of the bonds proposed to
be issued. Each such ordinance shall state that it is subject to the provisions
for referendum applicable to the city.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 12.84.770 REMEDIES FOR COLLECTION.
   All remedies provided for collection of due and unpaid charges which are
provided in the California Revenue Bond Law of 1941 may be exercised to enforce
payment of any charges levied under this section. A resolution prescribing or
revising such charges shall not be adopted until the Mayor and City Council or
the commission has given notice of and held a hearing thereon substantially as
provided in the Cal. Gov’t Code, § 54354.5, being part of the Revenue Bond Law
of 1941.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Revenue Bond Law of 1941, see Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 54300 et seq.
ARTICLE VI. PROCEDURAL ALTERNATIVE V
§ 12.84.780 GENERALLY.
   Whenever the Mayor and City Council deem it necessary, in order to provide
public off-street parking places or to otherwise perform the acts set forth in
§
12.84.020, the Mayor and City Council shall have and may exercise all of the
powers, jurisdiction and authority all as now or hereafter provided for in the
Revenue Bond Law of 1941, except as herein otherwise provided.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Revenue Bond Law of 1941, see Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 54300 et seq.
§ 12.84.790 ISSUANCE OF BONDS.
   The Mayor and City Council may authorize the issuance of revenue bonds
without first submitting to its qualified voters, at an election held for that
purpose, the proposition of issuing bonds pursuant to the Revenue Bond Law of
1941. The Mayor and City Council shall make such authorization by ordinance.
The ordinance shall describe, in general terms, the improvements or
acquisitions to be funded by the revenue bonds and the maximum amount of the
bonds proposed to be issued. Each such ordinance shall state that it is subject
to the provisions for referendum applicable to the city.
(Ord. 3589, passed 7-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Revenue Bond Law of 1941, see Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 54300 et seq.
CHAPTER 12.88: HANG GLIDING
Section
   
12.88.010   Definition - activity restricted except in certain places
   
12.88.020   Violation - penalty
§ 12.88.010 DEFINITION - ACTIVITY RESTRICTED EXCEPT IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of hang
gliding in or over any place within the city limits except in those places
recommended by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Community Services and
approved by the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   As used in this chapter, HANG GLIDING means any activity whereby any
person or persons glide, float or sail through the air in or on a hang glider.
A HANG GLIDER means a glider, kite, hot air balloon, device or contrivance so
constructed that it will carry a person on wind, air or human power.
(Ord. 3704, passed 2-9-1978; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
§ 12.88.020 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating or causing the violation of any
provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction
thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 3704, passed 2-9-1978; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 12.90: ESTABLISHMENT, FINANCING AND OPERATION OF ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS
Section
   
12.90.010   General statement
   
12.90.015   Landscape maintenance assessment district regulations
   
12.90.020   Provisions not exclusive
   
12.90.030   Definitions
   
12.90.040   Investigation and resolution
   
12.90.050   Zones
   
12.90.060   Changes in boundaries at hearing
   
12.90.070   Final determination of necessity and ordering work
   
12.90.080   Assessment financing alternatives
   
12.90.090   Assessment according to benefit
   
12.90.100   Engineer’s report
   
12.90.110   General provisions
   
12.90.120   Payment of construction assessment - discharge of lien
   
12.90.130   Changes
   
12.90.140   Violation - penalty
§ 12.90.010 GENERAL STATEMENT.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council find that, in order to provide an orderly
procedure for the acquisition, construction, improvement, completion, repair,
management, reconstruction, administration, maintenance, operation and
disposition of public property, public places and public improvements; for the
collecting of assessments to pay the cost thereof; for the making of
contributions therefor; and for the making of covenants and agreements with the
bondholders, if any, to secure payment of such bonds, if any, it is necessary
that the city exercise the powers it has by virtue of being a home rule city
and to provide such a procedure. The procedure provided for herein is to be an
alternative to any others provided by, under or pursuant to the Charter,
ordinances and code provisions of the city or the general laws of the state.
   (B)   In addition to matters specified elsewhere in this chapter, the city
is authorized to utilize assessment financing alternatives, including, without
limitation, the following:
      (1)   Acquire, by condemnation, purchase, gift, lease or any other means,
property necessary or convenient for the improvement, including any property
necessary or convenient for the opening, widening, straightening or extending
of streets or alleys necessary or convenient for the improvement;
      (2)   Improve any public places or public property within the district by
the construction thereon of any improvements necessary or convenient for the
purpose of the district;
      (3)   Administer, maintain, operate or repair the improvement or provide
therefor;
      (4)   Collect fees or charges to pay all or any part of the cost of
improving, repairing, maintaining or operating the improvement and of acquiring
and improving additional properties necessary to the improvement;
      (5)   Levy taxes and/or assessments to pay all or any part of the cost of
improving, repairing, maintaining or operating the improvement and of acquiring
and improving additional properties necessary to the improvement;
      (6)   Employ engineers, attorneys, financial consultants and other
persons necessary or convenient for the doing of any act authorized by this
chapter; and
      (7)   Do all acts and things necessary or convenient for the
accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-150, passed 4-7-1982)
§ 12.90.015 LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE ASSESSMENT DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   Within the limits of any City Landscape Maintenance Assessment District
(hereinafter “Assessment District”) or upon any public improvement, facility or
building located therein and owned or controlled by the city, it is unlawful
for any person to:
   (A)   Play or practice golf or use golf clubs in any area not designated for
such use;
   (B)   Operate any motor driven model airplane except in areas designated for
such use;
   (C)   Operate or park any motor vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle
Code within any Assessment District except upon areas designated for such use;
   (D)   Operate, drive or ride upon any bicycle, unicycle, tricycle, horse or
any other animal in any Assessment District except in areas designated and
posted specifically for such use;
   (E)   Leave any garbage, trash, cans, bottles, papers or other refuse
elsewhere than in the receptacle provided therefor;
   (F)   Discharge or shoot any firearm, air gun, slingshot or bow and arrow
except at places designated and posted specifically for such purposes;
   (G)   Dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any tree, plant, shrub,
bloom or flower, or any portion thereof except a duly authorized city employee
in the performance of his or her duty;
   (H)   Remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel or landscape
sprinkler system or any part thereof from any Assessment District except a duly
authorized city employee in the performance of his or her duty;
   (I)   Cut, break, deface or disturb any rock, building, cage, pen, monument,
sign, fence, structure, apparatus, equipment or property, or landscape
sprinkler system or any part thereof except a duly authorized city employee in
the performance of his or her duty;
   (J)   Light or maintain any fire unless such fire is lighted and maintained
only in a stove or fire circle or place provided for such purpose;
   (K)   Throw rocks or waste matter in unauthorized places;
   (L)   Camp, lodge or tarry overnight unless there are set aside certain
places for this purpose; the provisions of §
12.68.020 prohibiting any person to be or remain in any public park between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. of any day to 6:00 a.m. of the next succeeding day is
adopted herein by reference and made applicable to Assessment Districts; or
   (M)   Indulge in riotous, boisterous or indecent conduct; and no noisy,
disorderly or offensive person shall be allowed within any Assessment District;
the provisions of
Chapter 9.32 prohibiting any person from drinking alcoholic beverages in a
public place is adopted herein by reference.
(Ord. MC-981, passed 9-18-1986)
§ 12.90.020 PROVISIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The provisions of this chapter are not exclusive. The Mayor and City Council
shall have the power to provide other procedures or to follow district
procedures now or hereafter provided by general law; provided, however, that
whenever the city is acting pursuant to this chapter, the provisions of this
chapter shall be controlling to the extent that they are in conflict with any
of the provisions of said laws.
(Ord. MC-150, passed 4-7-1982)
§ 12.90.030 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the
definitions as contained in the Cal. Streets and Highways Code, §§ 5003 through
5024, inclusive, and § 22531 shall apply.
(Ord. MC-150, passed 4-7-1982)
§ 12.90.040 INVESTIGATION AND RESOLUTION.
   (A)   Findings required before ordering. Before ordering any acquisitions or
improvements or both, or the creation of any district pursuant hereto, where
the costs of said acquisitions or improvements, construction, completion,
repair, management, reconstruction, administration, maintenance and/or
operation are to be paid in whole or in part by special assessment or other
special assessment taxes upon property, the Mayor and City Council shall find
that the public convenience and necessity require such acquisitions,
improvements, construction, completion, repair, management, reconstruction,
administration, maintenance and/or operation in the manner provided in § 19,
Article XVI of the California Constitution.
   (B)   Preliminary determination of necessity and intention to proceed. A
resolution of preliminary determination of necessity and intention to proceed
(hereinafter referred to as resolution of intention) shall be adopted
describing in general terms, the following:
      (1)   The intention to proceed under this chapter;
      (2)   The proposed improvements, acquisition, construction, completion,
repair, management, reconstruction, administration, maintenance and/or
operation involved;
      (3)   The assessment financing alternative to be followed;
      (4)   The assessment benefit procedure to be followed;
      (5)   The estimated costs of such improvements, acquisition,
construction, completion, repair, management, reconstruction, administration,
maintenance or operation;
      (6)   The amount, based upon the estimated costs, to be assessed against
each particular parcel. This requirement may be satisfied by referencing the
engineer’s report;
      (7)   The maximum number of years such assessment shall be levied;
      (8)   The maximum amount of bonds, if any, to be issued to finance the
proposed improvements or acquisitions;
      (9)   Whether any ongoing management, administration, maintenance or
operation of the improvement will be required;
      (10)   That such resolution, together with a general description of the
proposed improvement and a map showing the exterior boundaries of the proposed
improvement district with relation to the territory immediately contiguous
thereto and to the proposed improvement, is on file with the City Clerk and is
available for inspection by any person or persons interested. This map shall
govern for all details as to the extent of the proposed improvement district;
      (11)   The resolution shall also state the time and place for a hearing
by the Mayor and City Council when and where any and all persons interested may
appear and show cause, if any, why the Mayor and City Council should not find
and determine that the public convenience and necessity require the formation
of the proposed improvement district and the proposed acquisitions or
improvements without compliance with the Special Assessment Investigation,
Limitation and Majority Protest Act of 1931 (hereinafter referred to as the
“Act”); on the question of the estimated cost; the amount of bonds to be
issued, if any; and the intention of the Mayor and City Council to proceed; and
      (12)   The resolution shall also state that at the time and place
specified in the resolution that any person interested will be heard; and, for
the purpose of determining a majority protest, any holder of title to taxable
real property within the proposed improvement district, acting individually or
as part of a group, may file a protest. Any such protest must be filed in
writing with the City Clerk, and shall include a description of the property in
which the signer thereof is interested sufficient to identify the same. If the
signers are not shown on the last equalized assessment roll as the owners of
such property, such protest must be accompanied by written evidence that such
signers are the owners of such property.
   (C)   Notice of hearing. Notice of hearing as set forth in the resolution
shall be given as follows:
      (1)   By publishing a copy of the resolution of intention once at least
15 days prior to the time fixed for the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the city;
      (2)   By posting a notice of the adoption of the resolution of intention
on all open streets within the district at not more than 300 foot intervals,
but not less than three in all, on each street so posted, at least 15 days
before the time fixed for the hearing. No proceeding shall be held invalid for
failure to post any street if this section has been substantially complied
with. If the boundaries of the proposed assessment district include more than
one-half square mile in area, posting requirements shall be satisfied by the
City Clerk posting such notice conspicuously on or near the main door of the
Council Chambers at least five days prior to the time fixed for the hearing.
For such districts, no street posting shall be required;
      (3)   By mailing a notice of the adoption of said resolution of intention
at least 15 days before the time fixed for the hearing to each holder of title
to taxable real property within the proposed improvement district as such
ownership is shown on the last equalized county assessment roll. The notices
posted and mailed shall conform to the Cal. Streets and Highways Code, §§ 5193
and 5195, respectively. The City Clerk shall cause all the above notices to be
given;
      (4)   At least 15 days before the time fixed for the hearing, the
engineer shall record an Assessment District Boundary Map with the County
Recorder, said map to conform to the requirements of Cal. Streets and Highways
Code, § 3110;
      (5)   The Mayor and City Council may proceed without notice and hearing
if, when considering passage of the resolution of intention, it is determined
by at least a four-fifths affirmative vote thereof (as determined in division
(D) below) that all of the owners of lots or land liable to be assessed or
their bona fide agents, have signed and filled a petition requesting the
formation of the district, indicate that they have no objections to the
proposed work or work and acquisition and agree as to the extent of the
district to be assessed and waive notice and hearing; and
      (6)   If the Mayor and City Council are proceeding pursuant to division
(C)(5) above, the map required to be recorded, pursuant to division (C)(4)
above, shall be recorded within five days after adoption of the resolution of
intention.
   (D)   Majority protest. The Mayor and City Council shall set forth, in the
resolution of intention, the basis by which a determination shall be made
whether a majority protest exists; possible bases may include, but shall not be
limited to, determination based on land area, assessed valuation of real
property, assessed valuation of land only or the number of property owners or
any other suitable determinant. At the time set for hearing protests, the Mayor
and City Council shall proceed to hear and pass upon all protests so made and
its decision shall be final and conclusive. The Mayor and City Council may
adjourn the hearing, from time to time. Any such protest may be withdrawn by
any owner making the same, either in writing at any time prior to the
conclusion of said protest hearing or any adjournment thereof, or orally on the
record during a hearing. If the Mayor and City Council find that the written
protests are made by persons who represent more than 50% of the property to be
assessed for the improvements, as determined on the basis of the determining
factor announced in advance, and protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the
same to less than a majority, no further proceedings shall be taken for a
period of one year from the date of the decision of the Mayor and City Council
on the hearing, unless the protests are overruled by action of the Mayor and
City Council. Action to overrule a majority protest shall require not less than
a four-fifths affirmative vote of the Council members present and voting; for
this purpose, five affirmative votes of six voting, or six affirmative votes of
seven voting shall be required.
(Ord. MC-150, passed 4-7-1982; Ord. MC-349, passed 3-7-1984)
Statutory reference:
   Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of
1931, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, Division 4, §§ 2800 et seq.
§ 12.90.050 ZONES.
   (A)   Generally. If, in the judgment of the Mayor and City Council, varying
benefits will be derived by the different parcels of real property lying within
the assessment district, the district may be divided into zones according to
benefits.
   (B)   Number. The district may be divided into as many zones, up to the
total number of parcels of real property in the district, as may be deemed
necessary, and each zone shall be composed of and include all the real property
within the district which will be benefitted in like manner.
   (C)   Resolution. When the district is to be divided into such zones, the
resolution of intention shall so state.
   (D)   Designation. Each zone shall be designated by a different letter or
number and shall be plainly shown on the map of the assessment district filed
in the office of the City Clerk and referred to in the resolution of intention,
either by separate boundaries, coloring or other convenient and graphic method,
so that all persons interested may with accuracy ascertain within which zone
any parcel of property is located.
   (E)   Plat. It shall be sufficient, in all cases where the improvement
district is to be divided into such zones according to benefits, if the
resolution of intention states that fact and refers to the map for the
boundaries and all details concerning the zones.
(Ord. MC-150, passed 4-7-1982)
§ 12.90.060 CHANGES IN BOUNDARIES AT HEARING.
   (A)   Orders. Based on the evidence presented during any hearing, the Mayor
and City Council may order changes in any of the matters provided in the
resolution of intention, including changes in the improvements, the boundaries
of the proposed assessment district and any zones therein and the proposed
diagram map or the proposed assessment. The Mayor and City Council may, without
further notice, order the exclusion of territory from the proposed district,
but shall not order the inclusion of additional territory within the district
except upon written request by a property owner for the inclusion of his or her
property or upon the giving of mailed notice of hearing to property owners upon
the question of the inclusion of their property in the district.
   (B)   Hearing. The hearing regarding majority protest shall be conducted as
announced in the resolution of intention, and any protests shall be filed in
the manner specified in §
12.90.040(B)(12).
(Ord. MC-150, passed 4-7-1982)
§ 12.90.070 FINAL DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY AND ORDERING WORK.
   (A)   If no protests are made, or if any protests shall have been heard and
overruled, the Mayor and City Council may adopt a resolution finding and
determining that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed
improvements and/or acquisitions, management, administration, maintenance and/
or operation. Such resolution shall be referred to as “resolution ordering
work.” Such resolution shall determine that the Act shall not apply, shall
order the work, shall direct the City Clerk to advertise for bids and shall
specify that the contract will be awarded pursuant to the standard procedures
used by the city in the award of public works contracts.
   (B)   The resolution ordering work shall be adopted by the affirmative vote
of not less than four-fifths of the members of the City Council voting thereon,
as in §
12.90.040, and any findings and determination so adopted shall be final and
conclusive.
   (C)   (1)   Whenever the total amount bid by the lowest responsible bidder,
plus the estimated amount of incidental costs exceed, by more than 15%, the
engineer’s estimate of cost, as stated in the resolution of intention, the
Mayor and City Council shall be consulted before further action is taken. The
Mayor and City Council may thereupon order any one of the following:
         (a)   Re-advertise for proposals or bids for the performance of the
work as in the first instance, without further proceedings;
         (b)   Terminate the proceedings; or
         (c)   1.   Notify the property owners within the district by mail of
such increase and seek guidance from affected property owners.
            2.   Each affected property owner will be asked to express a
preference as to:
               a.   Accepting the bid as submitted;
               b.   Rejecting the bid and re-advertising; and
               c.   Terminating the proceedings.
      (2)   If the proceedings are taken pursuant to division (C)(1)(c)1.
above, existence of a majority protest as earlier provided for will be
determined; if such majority protest is determined to exist, the Mayor and City
Council shall utilize the procedures of §
12.90.040(D) herein, and proceed in accordance therewith.
(Ord. MC-150, passed 4-7-1982)
§ 12.90.080 ASSESSMENT FINANCING ALTERNATIVES.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council shall determine which of various financing
alternatives shall be utilized.
   (B)   Alternatives available include the following.
      (1)   The improvement and/or acquisition may be pre-funded by the city
and the assessment levied, collected and enforced in the same manner, at the
same time, and with the same penalties and interest, as in the case of taxes
levied for the city, to secure repayment to the city of said pre-funding.
      (2)   Bonds may be issued to finance the improvement and/or acquisition
and the assessment may be levied, collected and enforced in the same manner, at
the same time and with the same penalties and interest, as in the case of taxes
levied for the city, to pay the premium and interest, if any, due on said
bonds. If this assessment financing alternative is used, the city may retain
bond counsel to provide the details of the issuance and repayment of said
bonds.
      (3)   Bonds may be issued before contracting or obtaining options for the
purchase of land, property or rights-of-way to be acquired, if any, or
obtaining a judgment in eminent domain for the acquisition thereof.
      (4)   The financing for maintenance, repair, management, reconstruction,
administration or operation of the district, if any, shall be included in the
assessment roll for the improvement and/or acquisition, if any, and shall be
the total cost for such maintenance, repair, management, reconstruction,
administration or operation as estimated by the engineer for each fiscal year
in which the assessment is to be levied and collected.
      (5)   The provisions of the Cal. Streets and Highways Code, §§ 8800 to
8809, inclusive, shall apply to assessments levied hereunder.
(Ord. MC-150, passed 4-7-1982)
§ 12.90.090 ASSESSMENT ACCORDING TO BENEFIT.
   (A)   Assessment. After the adoption of the resolution ordering work, the
engineer shall proceed to estimate as to all lots and parcels of land within
the assessment district, as shown by the diagram map, the benefits arising from
such work, and to be received by each such lot or parcel of land. He or she
shall thereupon prepare an assessment roll for submission to the Mayor and City
Council for confirmation, by resolution, which assesses upon and against the
lands in the assessment district the total amount of the costs and expenses of
such work and/or the cost of management administration, maintenance or
operation of the improvement, if any, for the first year or for the term of the
assessment. Such roll shall assess the total sum upon the several lots or
parcels of land in the assessment district benefitted thereby, in proportion to
the estimated benefits to be received by each of the several lots or parcels of
land within the district or within each zone included in the district, if any.
   (B)   Method of determining the assessment benefit. The method of
determining the assessment benefit to be received by each of the said several
lots or parcels of land within the district and/or zone shall be set forth in
the resolution of intention, which may include, but shall not be limited to,
land area, assessed valuation of real property, assessed valuation of land only
or number of lots or parcels.
   (C)   Assessment computation. The annual assessment provided for in this
section shall be computed on the basis of the formula set forth in the
resolution of intention originally adopted or as modified by subsequent change
and modification or other proceedings conducted pursuant to this chapter or any
other law, and the limitations upon the rate or period thereof provided in the
Act (as defined in §
12.90.040(B)(11)) shall not apply. If the assessed value of any parcel of
property does not appear on the tax roll, an estimated assessed value of such
parcel shall be made by the Director of Development Services in consultation
with the County Assessor, and such estimate shall, for purposes of such ad
valorem assessment, be considered the assessed value of such parcel.
   (D)   Subsequent year assessments. Except as otherwise provided by the
issuance of bonds, the cost for the improvement and/or acquisition or
management, administration, maintenance or operation of the improvement, if
any, for any subsequent fiscal year during which an assessment is to be levied
and collected within the assessment district pursuant to this chapter, shall be
accomplished by preparing an assessment roll for submission to the Mayor and
City Council for confirmation by resolution for each fiscal year in which the
assessment is to be levied and collected, and shall constitute the levy of an
assessment for the fiscal year referred to in the assessment. When a bond issue
funds the costs involved, such assessments shall be levied and collected as
specified in the bond authorizing resolution or ordinance.
(Ord. MC-150, passed 4-7-1982; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.90.100 ENGINEER’S REPORT.
   (A)   Prior to or at the time of the adoption of the resolution of
intention, the engineer shall file a report with the City Clerk. When the
report is filed with the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall present it to the
Mayor and City Council for consideration. The Mayor and City Council may modify
it in any respect. The report, as modified, shall stand as the report for the
purpose of all subsequent proceedings except that it may be confirmed, modified
or corrected as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   The report shall be made available to the public for inspection and
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   A description of the type of improvement and/or acquisition;
      (2)   An estimate of the cost of the improvement, including incidental
costs, and/or the cost of the acquisition, if any, and the annual costs of
management, administration, maintenance or operation of the improvement, if
any;
      (3)   A plat map indicating thereon the boundaries of the proposed
assessment district; and
      (4)   A proposed assessment roll showing the estimated individual
assessments to be assessed against each parcel within the district for each
year an assessment is to be levied and collected within the district.
(Ord. MC-150, passed 4-7-1982)
§ 12.90.110 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The following general provisions shall apply to all proceedings taken
hereunder.
   (A)   City initiation. The city may prepare a report, adopt a resolution of
intention, form an assessment district or take any other action to provide the
improvement and/or acquisition, construction, completion, repair, management,
reconstruction, administration, maintenance or operation, without any petition
therefor.
   (B)   Contributions. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter,
the Mayor and City Council may provide for a contribution or contributions by
the city of part of the costs and expenses of the work or may accept and
provide for contribution toward the cost and expenses of any work done under
this chapter, from any funds made available for the purpose of the district by
any local, state or national agency or authority, or from any other person or
entity, and it shall not be necessary to set forth or give notice of such
contribution in the resolution of intention or in any other proceedings under
this chapter. Such notice may be given in the discretion of the Mayor and City
Council.
   (C)   Lapse of time. It shall not be necessary for any specified time to
elapse between the performance of acts except as otherwise required by this
chapter.
   (D)   Resolution sufficient. The Mayor and City Council may act, by
resolution, where an ordinance is specified by general law.
   (E)   Assessment upon public property. Whenever proceedings are to be
undertaken in accordance with this chapter, the Mayor and City Council may
provide, in the resolution of intention, that any real property belonging to
any county, city, public agency, school board, educational, penal or reform
institution or institution for the feebleminded or the insane shall be assessed
in accordance with the provisions of the Cal. Streets and Highways Code, §§
5300 through 5325, inclusive.
   (F)   Termination upon determination of no benefit. If the Mayor and City
Council find and determine that the area proposed to constitute the assessment
district will not be benefitted thereby, the Mayor and City Council shall
terminate the proceedings.
   (G)   Effective date; effect of determinations in resolution; limitation on
actions. From and after the date the Mayor and City Council adopt the
resolution of intention, the area named therein shall constitute the assessment
district within the city bearing the name set forth in the resolution. The
determinations made in the resolution forming the assessment district shall be
final and conclusive. No action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside or
void the resolution, or any of the proceedings, acts or determinations
theretofore taken, done or made pursuant to this chapter, shall be maintained
by any person unless such action or proceeding is commenced within 30 days
after the adoption of such resolution. Thereafter, all such actions or
proceedings, and any defense of invalidity of such resolution or of such
proceedings, acts or determinations, are forever barred.
   (H)   Disposition of property. The Mayor and City Council, subject to the
provisions of the City Charter, may determine that any parcel of property
acquired from the proceeds of the assessment district or any improvements,
extensions or replacements thereof or additions thereto are no longer needed
for the purpose of the assessment district or such facilities may be otherwise
better provided. Subject to the provisions of the City Charter and restrictions
in the resolution providing for the issuance of any outstanding bonds, if any,
relating to the facilities involved, the property may thereafter be sold,
leased or otherwise disposed of, either during or after the term of the
assessment or bonds and the proceeds placed in a fund as designated by the
Mayor and City Council and used for the benefit of the assessment district.
   (I)   Assessment roll. Except as otherwise provided by the issuance of
bonds, the assessment roll shall state the amount to be assessed upon each lot
or parcel of land within the district and shall refer to said lots or parcels
of land by their respective County Assessor’s parcel number as shown on the
last equalized county assessment roll, and shall refer to the fiscal year to
which it applies, and shall, upon its confirmation, be filed in the office of
the Director of Development Services. When a bond issue funds the costs
involved, such assessment roll procedures as are provided for in the bond-
authorizing resolution or ordinance shall prevail.
   (J)   Assessment diagram map.
      (1)   Prior to the confirmation of the assessment roll by the Mayor and
City Council, the Engineer shall file with the City Clerk and the Director of
Development Services an assessment diagram map. Upon the confirmation of the
assessment roll, the City Clerk shall record a notice of assessment, as
provided in Cal. Streets and Highways Code, § 3114. Whereupon the said
assessment shall attach as a lien upon the property assessed, as provided in
Cal. Streets and Highways Code, § 3115. A copy of the notice of assessment so
recorded shall be published pursuant to the Cal. Gov’t Code, § 6066. Notice of
the recording of said assessment shall be given pursuant to the provisions of
Cal. Streets and Highways Code, § 10404(a), (b) and (c) only.
      (2)   The diagram map shall show the following:
         (a)   The exterior boundaries of the assessment district;
         (b)   The boundaries of any zones within the district; and
         (c)   The lines and dimensions of each lot or parcel of land within
the district and the relative location of the same to the work to be done. Each
lot or parcel shall be identified by a distinctive number or letter.
            1.   The lines and dimensions of each lot or parcel of land shown
on the diagram map shall conform to those shown on the County’s Assessor’s maps
for the fiscal year in which the diagram map is prepared. The diagram map may
refer to the County Assessor’s maps for a detailed description of the lines and
dimensions of any lots or parcels, in which case, those maps shall govern for
all details concerning the lines and dimensions of such lots or parcels.
            2.   Any changes in the lines and dimensions of any lot or parcel
of land shown on the diagram map so filed with the City Clerk due to any lot
splits or subdivisions which may occur in subsequent years need not be changed
on the diagram map; however, such changes shall be reflected in the assessment
roll for each subsequent year.
   (K)   Dissolution of assessment district. Upon completion of the term for
the collection of assessments within the district as set forth in the
resolution of intention, the confirmation and collection of the final
assessment, or upon adoption of a resolution dissolving the district, the
district shall automatically dissolve and shall no longer be binding upon the
property within the district.
   (L)   District not exclusive. The formation of an assessment district
pursuant to this chapter within any area of the city shall not be exclusive.
The Mayor and City Council shall have the authority to create any number of
districts within the same area, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-150, passed 4-7-1982; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.90.120 PAYMENT OF CONSTRUCTION ASSESSMENT - DISCHARGE OF LIEN.
   The owner of or any person interested in any lot or parcel of land upon
which an assessment for construction has been levied under the terms of this
chapter may, at any time before commencement of proceedings for sale, pay off
the assessment and discharge the land involved from the lien of the assessment.
The discharge may be had by paying to the Treasurer the unpaid principal sum of
the assessment, with interest thereon (if any) up to the next succeeding July
1. As used in this section, UNPAID PRINCIPAL SUM means those installments of
principal that are due to be paid at future dates through the term of the
assessment. This provision shall not apply to any maintenance assessment.
(Ord. MC-150, passed 4-7-1982)
§ 12.90.130 CHANGES.
   Any change of work, boundaries of assessment district, amounts of
assessments or proceedings taken pursuant to this chapter after the hearing of
protests on the resolution of intention shall be conducted under the provisions
of Cal. Streets and Highways Code, §§ 10350 through 10358.
(Ord. MC-150, passed 4-7-1982)
§ 12.90.140 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating or causing the violation of any
provision of §
12.90.015 is guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction
thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-981, passed 9-18-1996)
CHAPTER 12.92: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND DRIVEWAYS
Section
   
12.92.010   Scope and definitions
   
12.92.020   Adoption of state statutes by reference
   
12.92.030   Duty to remove abandoned driveways and reconstruct appurtenant
areas
   
12.92.035   Removal of curbs and gutters
   
12.92.040   Duty to maintain and repair sidewalks and curbs
   
12.92.050   Duty to construct
   
12.92.060   Service and contents of notice
   
12.92.070   Hearing and assessment of costs
   
12.92.080   Reserved
   
12.92.090   Limitation of actions
§ 12.92.010 SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to the maintenance, repair, construction,
reconstruction or removal of sidewalks, gutters, pavements, driveways and
curbs; the installation of storm and sanitary drainage facilities, water mains,
pipes, conduits, tunnels, hydrants and other necessary works and appliances for
providing water service, parkway trees and street lighting facilities in front
of properties in any block where a sidewalk, gutter, pavement, driveway; the
installation of storm and sanitary sewer drainage facilities, water mains,
pipes, conduits, tunnels, hydrants and other necessary works and appliances for
providing water service, parkway trees and street lighting facilities, or curb,
or all of them.
   (B)   This chapter shall apply to property fronting on, or otherwise
adjacent to, or in conjunction with, any street, arterial or collector street
section.
   (C)   This chapter shall apply to driveway construction, reconstruction or
removal and curb infill in front of a vacant lot, unimproved property or where
an existing driveway no longer serves any development on a lot or property.
   (D)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BLOCK. Property facing one side of any street between the next
intersecting streets or between the terminus of a dedicated right-of-way of a
street and an intersecting street. Street does not include an alley or other
right-of-way, unless it is of the same width as a regular residential minimum-
width street, approved as part of a master plan of circulation or streets by
the city. In the case of an alley, BLOCK means property facing both sides of
any alley between the next intersecting streets or alleys, or between the
terminus of an alley and an intersecting street. In the case of street
lighting, BLOCK means property facing the side of any street on which the
improvement is to be constructed between the next intersecting streets on the
side to be improved or between the terminus of a dedicated right-of-way of a
street and a street intersecting the side to be improved; or property facing
the side of any street on which the improvement is to be constructed between
the next intersecting streets on the side to be improved or between the
terminus of a dedicated right-of-way of a street and a street intersecting the
side to be improved and the property facing the opposite side of the street.
Where a BLOCK exceeds 1,000 feet in length, a length of frontage of 1,000 feet
constitutes a BLOCK as used in this chapter, if so designated by the Director
of Development Services. A determination by the Director of Development
Services of such a 1,000-foot BLOCK establishes a BLOCK and cannot later be
changed to include a portion of said 1,000-foot BLOCK in another BLOCK.
      COST, CONSTRUCTION COST or variants thereof. The actual cost of
construction of the work and any incidental or administrative expenses.
      DRIVEWAY. A paved portion of a public street providing an unobstructed
passage from the roadway to an off-street area used for driving, servicing,
parking or otherwise accommodating motor vehicles.
      FRONTING and FACING. Abutting in the case of property adjoining an alley
improvement. In the case of street lighting, in determining how much of the
front footage of a block has been improved, the front footage of property
benefitting from existing installations may be included regardless of the side
of the street on which the installation has been constructed.
      SIDEWALKS or CURBS. Includes gutters, driveways, pavement to the center
line of the street, full pavement in alleys, storm and sanitary drainage
facilities, water mains, pipes, conduits, tunnels, hydrants and other necessary
works and appliances for providing water service, paving to provide a parking
lane on arterial or collector street sections, parkway trees and street
lighting facilities.
      SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS. The Director of Development Services of the
City of San Bernardino, or his or her designee.
   (E)   This chapter shall apply to the removal of existing curbs and gutters,
and construction of new curbs and gutters and fill-in street paving, as
required to match adjoining curb alignments, for parcels with a frontage of
less than 300 feet.
(Ord. MC-691, passed 12-19-1989; Ord. MC-796, passed 7-2-1991; Ord. MC-1027,
passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.92.020 ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES BY REFERENCE.
   The rules, regulations and procedures as set forth in the Cal. Streets and
Highways Code, Division 7, Part 3, Chapters 22, 24 and 27 are adopted by
reference except as modified by this chapter.
(Ord. MC-691, passed 12-19-1989)
§ 12.92.030 DUTY TO REMOVE ABANDONED DRIVEWAYS AND RECONSTRUCT APPURTENANT
AREAS.
   (A)   When the owners of lots or portions of lots fronting on any portion of
a public street have driveways existing which no longer serve any improvements
on said lot or parcel of property, the owners shall remove and eliminate the
driveways and construct or reconstruct sidewalks, curbs and parkways in
conformance with the remainder of the block.
   (B)   When the Director of Development Services finds any such abandoned
driveways, the Director of Development Services shall notify the owners of the
property to remove the abandoned driveways and to reconstruct the appurtenant
areas.
(Ord. MC-691, passed 12-19-1989; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.92.035 REMOVAL OF CURBS AND GUTTERS.
   (A)   (1)   For any lot with a total frontage of less than 300 feet on a
public street where that lot’s existing curbs and gutters do not match
adjoining sections, the owner of such lot shall remove the existing curbs and
gutters and other appurtenant improvements in conflict and shall construct new
curbs and gutters and other appurtenant improvements which are aligned with the
adjoining sections. For corner lots, the parcel on the other side of the
intersecting street shall be considered as an adjoining section.
      (2)   These improvements will be required only if the existing dedicated
right-of-way for street and highway purposes will accommodate the relocation of
the curbs and gutters, except for minor amounts required to allow construction
of standard handicap ramps at intersections.
   (B)   When the Director of Development Services finds any such improvements
adjoining any lots or portions of lots that need to be widened to match
adjoining sections, the Director of Development Services shall notify the
owners of the property to remove the existing improvements and construct new
improvements, in conformance with the remainder of the block.
(Ord. MC-796, passed 7-2-1991; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.92.040 DUTY TO MAINTAIN AND REPAIR SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.
   (A)   The owners of lots or portions of lots fronting on any portion of a
public street or place when that street or place is improved or if and when the
area between the property line of the adjacent property and the street line is
maintained as a park or parking strip, shall maintain any sidewalk and curb in
such condition that the sidewalk and curb will not endanger persons or property
and maintain it in a condition which will not interfere with the public
convenience in its use.
   (B)   When the Director of Public Services finds any sidewalks or curbs out
of repair or pending reconstruction and in condition to endanger persons or
property or in condition to interfere with the public convenience in its use,
the Director of Public Services shall notify the owners of the property
fronting on that portion of such sidewalk or curb so out of repair to repair
the sidewalk or curb.
(Ord. MC-691, passed 12-19-1989; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1274,
passed 7-22-2008)
§ 12.92.050 DUTY TO CONSTRUCT.
   (A)   The owners of lots or portions of lots fronting on any public street
or place when the street or place has been improved by the construction of
sidewalks or curbs for a total frontage of more than 50% on one side of such
street or place in any block, or where a petition signed by the owners of more
than 60% of the front footage of any part of an unimproved portion or portions
of a block has been filed with the City Clerk requesting the installation of
such improvements in front of said part, or whenever the city, upon its own
motion, orders the installation of such improvements in front of said part,
shall have the duty of constructing or causing the construction of sidewalks or
curbs in front of their properties upon notice so to do by the city.
   (B)   When the Director of Development Services finds that sidewalks or
curbs have been constructed in front of properties constituting more than 50%
of the frontage in any block, or where a petition signed by the owners of more
than 60% of the front footage of the block has been filed with the City Clerk
requesting the installation of such improvements, or whenever the city, upon
its own motion, has ordered the installation of such improvements in front of
said part, said Director of Development Services shall notify the owners of the
property fronting on that portion of the street in such block in which no
sidewalks or curbs have been constructed theretofore, to construct or cause to
be constructed sidewalks or curbs in front of their property.
(Ord. MC-691, passed 12-19-1989; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.92.060 SERVICE AND CONTENTS OF NOTICE.
   (A)   Notice to construct, repair, maintain, remove or reconstruct
sidewalks, curbs or driveways may be given by delivering a written notice
personally to the owner of the property or to the person in possession of the
property facing upon the sidewalks, curbs or driveways to be improved or by
mailing a written notice to the owner of the property thereof at his or her
last known address as appears on the tax assessment rolls of mailing a written
notice to the owner of the property thereof at his or her last known address as
appears on the tax assessment rolls of the county. Immediately upon mailing the
notice, the property shall be posted in a conspicuous place.
   (B)   The notice shall particularly specify what work is required to be
done, where standard construction drawings may be obtained showing how it is to
be done and what materials shall be used in the construction and shall further
specify that if a permit is not obtained and the construction is not commenced
within 60 days after notice is given and diligently and without interruption
prosecuted to completion, the Director of Development Services shall cause the
construction to be done, and the cost of the same shall be a lien on the
property. However, upon petition by all of the affected property owners, the
60-day period may be waived and the Director of Development Services may
immediately cause the construction to be done, and the cost of the same shall
be a lien upon the property.
   (C)   The notice shall specify the day, hour and place when the Mayor and
City Council will hear objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by
any property owner or other interested persons, but in no case shall such
hearing be sooner than ten days after giving notice. Upon the day and hour
fixed for the hearing, the Mayor and City Council shall hear and pass upon
objections or protests and their decision shall be final and conclusive.
   (D)   If the required improvements are not commenced and prosecuted to
completion with due diligence as required by the notice, the Director of
Development Services shall forthwith make the required improvements.
(Ord. MC-691, passed 12-19-1989; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.92.070 HEARING AND ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   (A)   Upon the completion of the improvements, the Director of Development
Services shall cause notice of the cost of the improvements to be given in the
manner specified in §
12.92.060, except for posting, said notice shall specify the day, hour and
place when the Mayor and City Council will hear and pass upon a report by the
Director of Development Services of the cost of the improvements, together with
any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any property owner
liable to be assessed for the cost of such improvements and any other
interested persons. In no case shall the hearing provided for in this section
be sooner than ten days after giving of notice.
   (B)   The cost of the improvements may include administrative expenses
required for the proper coordination and functioning of the improvements in
front of the parcel as determined by the Mayor and City Council.
   (C)   Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the Mayor and City
Council shall hear and pass, upon the report of the Director of Development
Services, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any
of the property owners liable to be assessed for such construction and any
other interested persons. Thereupon, the Mayor and City Council may make such
revision, correction or modifications in the report as it may deem just, after
which, by resolution, the report, as submitted, or as revised, corrected or
modified, shall be confirmed. The Mayor and City Council may adjourn the
hearings from time to time. The decisions of the Mayor and City Council, on all
protests and objections which may be made, shall be final and conclusive.
   (D)   Upon confirmation of the above report, the Mayor and City Council may
order the notice of lien to be turned over to the accounting officer of the
city, whereupon it shall be the duty of this officer to have the amount of the
assessment added to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the lot or
parcel of land. If the city taxes are collected by the county officials, the
notice of lien shall be delivered to the County Auditor, who shall enter the
amount thereof on the county assessment book opposite the description of the
particular property and the amount shall be collected together with all other
taxes thereon against the property. The notice of lien shall be delivered to
the County Auditor before the date fixed by law for the delivery of the
assessment book to the County Board of Equalization.
(Ord. MC-691, passed 12-19-1989; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.92.080 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-737, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 12.92.090 LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
   (A)   Time. No action, suit or proceeding to set aside, cancel, avoid, annul
or correct any assessment or reassessment, or to review any of the proceedings,
acts or determinations therein, or to question the validity of, or to enjoin
the collection of the assessments or reassessments, or to enjoin the issuance
of bonds to represent the same, shall be maintained by any person unless such
action is commenced within 30 days after the recording of the warrant, diagram
and assessment or reassessment, and thereafter, all persons shall be barred
from any such action or any defense of invalidity of the assessment or of bonds
issued thereon or of the reassessment if such is made and of bonds issued
thereon.
   (B)   Property unlawfully dedicated or acquired. No proceedings taken or had
under this division (B) shall ever be held to be invalid on the ground that the
street, right-of-way, public property or any portion thereof, upon which the
work or any part thereof is or was done has not been lawfully dedicated or
acquired; provided the same is lawfully dedicated or acquired, or an order for
possession prior to judgment has been obtained.
(Ord. MC-691, passed 12-19-1989)
CHAPTER 12.93: CITY PARTICIPATION IN SIDEWALK/CURB REPAIR AND SEWER
CONNECTION COSTS
Section
   
12.93.010   Participation by city
   
12.93.020   Administration
§ 12.93.010 PARTICIPATION BY CITY.
   (A)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, the California Streets
and Highways Code or any other provision of law, the city, at its discretion,
may contribute up to 100% of the costs to be paid by the property owner for
repair or installation of sidewalk, curb, gutter, paved parkway improvements,
infilling of curb depressions or driveway approaches excluding improvements
projects constructed under
Chapter 12.92. The Public Services Director shall determine when to contribute
up to 100% based on the cost of the repair, the ability of the property owner
to pay and the cooperation exhibited by the property owner; provided that the
property owner executes and delivers to the Public Services Director a waiver
and release in a form approved by the City Attorney, or his or her designee.
Such determination shall be subject to appeal to the Mayor and City Council
pursuant to
Chapter 2.64.
   (B)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, the California Streets
and Highways Code or any other provision of law, the city, at its discretion,
may waive 50% of the installation costs to be paid by the property owner for
connection of the sewer line from the lateral to the property line for an
existing owner-occupied single-family residence when installed by the Public
Services Department. The Public Services Director shall determine when to waive
the 50% based on the cost of the installation, the ability of the property
owner to pay and the length of time the owners of the property have paid a
monthly sewer service charge; provided that the property owner executes and
delivers to the Public Services Director a waiver and release in a form
approved by the City Attorney, or his or her designee. Such determination shall
be subject to appeal to the Mayor and City Council pursuant to
Chapter 2.64.
(Ord. MC-737, passed 7-16-1990; Ord. MC-778, passed 4-16-1991; Ord. MC-1274,
passed 7-22-2008)
§ 12.93.020 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Director of Public Services may promulgate written procedures,
regulations, guidelines and fees pertaining to the implementation of this
chapter. Such procedures, regulations, guidelines and fees shall not become
effective until approved by resolution by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-737, passed 7-16-1990)
CHAPTER 12.94: IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
Section
   
12.94.010   Definitions
   
12.94.020   Issuance of bonds - administrative fee
   
12.94.030   Advance of estimated costs - reimbursement of expenses of surplus
§ 12.94.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   1911 ACT. Refers to “the Improvement Act of 1911,” Cal. Streets and Highways
Code, Division 7, being §§ 5000 et seq.
   1913 ACT. Refers to “the Municipal Improvement Act of 1913,” Cal. Streets
and Highways Code, Division 12, §§ 10000 et seq.
   1915 ACT. Refers to “the Improvement Bond Act of 1915,” Cal. Streets and
Highways Code, Division 10, being §§ 8500 et seq.
   DEVELOPER-REQUESTED IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT. Any improvement district where a
developer representing a majority in interest of the owners of the land
affected requests that the city form such district to enable such owners to
develop a new subdivision or parcel map of any type or undertake enlargement,
development, expansion or change of use of existing commercial or industrial
development. Whether a particular developer represents a majority in interest
of the owner shall be determined by the Director of Development Services.
   IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT. Any assessment district created by action of the Mayor
and City Council for the purpose of funding curbs, gutters, streets, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and other public improvements necessary or
convenient for the purpose of the district being formed. Public improvements
shall include, but shall not be limited to, those itemized in Cal. Streets and
Highways Code, §§ 5101, 8570 and 10100.
(Ord. MC-149, passed 4-7-1982; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.94.020 ISSUANCE OF BONDS - ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.
   For any developer-requested improvement district in which the improvements
are to be financed by issuance of assessment district bonds, bonds may be
authorized and issued by authority of the Mayor and City Council under the
provisions of the 1911 Act, the 1913 Act, the 1915 Act or any other state law
or any ordinance or provision of the municipal code, as the Mayor and City
Council may determine. For any such issuance, an administrative fee of 1% of
the total bond issue shall be paid to the city’s Assessment District Reserve
Fund to be used exclusively for the financing of assessment districts as
authorized by the Mayor and City Council. Such fee shall be paid out of the
proceeds of the sale of the bonds, and shall be in addition to any other
applicable fees, charges or incidental expenses.
(Ord. MC-149, passed 4-7-1982; Ord. MC-467, passed 7-16-1985)
§ 12.94.030 ADVANCE OF ESTIMATED COSTS - REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES OF SURPLUS.
   Prior to the adoption of a resolution of intention relative to any developer
requested improvement district, the developer representing the owner or owners
of the property therein shall advance to the city the estimated costs of
organizing, engineering and developing the proposed assessment district, in
such amount and payable at such times as the Director of Development Services
shall designate. Such advancement of funds shall be utilized solely for the
expenses of organizing, engineering and developing the proposal for such
district. In the event the district fails at the public hearing or is otherwise
terminated for any reason, or the bonds are not sold, such portion of the
advancement representing actual costs to the city in preparing for such
improvement district, including administrative costs, shall be held by the
city, as reimbursement for such expense, and any surplus remaining shall be
returned to the person or persons depositing such funds. If the improvement
district is finalized and bonds are sold, the expenses shall be reimbursed to
the city from bond proceeds; and the entire amount deposited shall be returned
to the person or persons depositing such funds.
(Ord. MC-149, passed 4-7-1982; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
CHAPTER 12.95: SUBSTANDARD DRIVEWAY APPROACHES
Section
   
12.95.010   Substandard driveway approaches: city participation
   
12.95.020   Eligible projects
   
12.95.030   Work performed
§ 12.95.010 SUBSTANDARD DRIVEWAY APPROACHES: CITY PARTICIPATION.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, the California Streets and
Highways Code or any other provision of law, the city, at its discretion, may
contribute 50% of the cost incurred for removal and reconstruction of
substandard driveway approaches as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. MC-854, passed 11-17-1992)
§ 12.95.020 ELIGIBLE PROJECTS.
   Eligible projects for city participation of one-half the cost shall be only
those driveway approaches which exit onto arterial or collector streets and
which have been found by the Director of Development Services to not be in
accordance with the Department of Development Services’ Standard Drawing No.
203.
(Ord. MC-854, passed 11-17-1992; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.95.030 WORK PERFORMED.
   The work hereunder may be performed by a private contractor engaged by the
property owner or, by the city, at the discretion of the Director of
Development Services and following application to the Development Services
Department for participation in the program.
   (A)   An application for work to be performed may be initiated by either the
city or the property owner.
   (B)   Applications, outlining the work to be performed, shall be completed
on forms to be provided by the Development Services Department.
   (C)   The Director of Development Services, upon finding that an application
is consistent with the intent of this chapter, shall have an inspection made of
the project; estimate the cost of the work; and advise the property owner of
the dollar amount of the city’s one-half contribution.
   (D)   If the Director of Development Services makes a determination that the
city shall perform the work, the property owner shall deposit the sum
determined pursuant to division (A) above with the Development Services
Department, prior to the work being performed. The Director of Development
Services shall determine time frame for such payment and if the property owner
shall have not made such deposit, within such time frame, then that property
shall be dropped from the project.
   (E)   If the Director of Development Services makes a determination that the
property owner may perform the work, then the property owner, or his or her
private contractor, must obtain a no cost public works construction permit.
Following final inspection and approval of the work by the city, and upon the
presentation of receipted bills or invoices, the Director of Development
Services shall authorize 50% of the actual cost of the project, or the sum
determined pursuant to division (C) above, whichever is less, to be paid to the
property owner.
   (F)   The Director of Development Services may initiate the removal and
reconstruction hereunder by mailing a letter to the property owner advising of
the city’s participation program and enclosing an application form. In the
event a property owner fails to respond or declines to participate in the
program within 15 days after the date of the notice, all proceedings will
terminate.
   (G)   Any unforeseen necessary extra work which may arise during such
removal and reconstruction or caused by such removal and reconstruction shall
be shared equally by the property owner and the city.
(Ord. MC-854, passed 11-17-1992; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
CHAPTER 12.96: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF LANDSCAPED FRONTAGES ON CITY
RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND WITHIN THE BUILDING SETBACK AREA UP TO A MAXIMUM OF TWENTY
FEET
Section
   
12.96.010   Scope and definitions
   
12.96.030   Participation by property owners
   
12.96.040   Participation by city
   
12.96.050   Duty to install landscaping
   
12.96.060   Duty to maintain and repair after installation
   
12.96.070   Service and contents of notice to maintain after installation
   
12.96.080   Hearing and assessment of costs
   
12.96.090   Limitation of actions
§ 12.96.010 SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to the installation and maintenance of
landscaping in front of properties in any specified block where frontages do
not have landscaping which complies with city standards and development codes
and provides for city participation with property owners for sharing the costs
of installation on that portion of the property fronting on the right-of-way
and the building set back area up to a maximum of 20 feet.
   (B)   This chapter shall apply to a lot or property fronting on, or
otherwise adjacent to, or in conjunction with, specified street, arterial or
collector street section or specified commercial zones as listed in the
procedure resolution.
   (C)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COST, INSTALLATION COST or variants thereof. Includes the actual cost of
installation and/or maintenance of the landscaping and any incidental or
administrative expenses.
      DIRECTOR OF PARKS, RECREATION AND COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT or
DESIGNEE. Shall be responsible for review and approval of landscape development
plans and specifications and final inspection after completion of construction
phase.
      FRONTAGES. All the property within the city rights-of-way and the
building setback up to a maximum of 20 feet fronting and facing the streets and
arterials in specified locations and commercial zones in the city.
(Ord. MC-786, passed 5-21-1991)
§ 12.96.030 PARTICIPATION BY PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   When the owners of lots or portions of lots fronting on any portion of
a public street have frontages existing which do not meet city codes and
standards for landscape improvements on said lot or parcel of property, the
owners may apply for city cost sharing assistance to install landscaping in
conformance with the remainder of the block and in compliance with city
approved plans and specifications.
   (B)   After applications for assistance and the agreement for joint city
property owner participation are approved, the Director of Development Services
shall notify the property owner to prepare landscape plans for approval and
upon approval of plans to cause landscaping to be installed on the frontages.
Landscape plans shall be reviewed and approved by the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Community Services Department prior to commencement of landscape
installation.
(Ord. MC-786, passed 5-21-1991; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.96.040 PARTICIPATION BY CITY.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter or any other provision of
law, the city may pay one-half of the cost of construction of landscaping
located on the right-of-way and within the building setback area up to a
maximum of 20 feet, at the discretion of the Development Services Director. The
Development Services Director shall make such determination based on the cost
of the construction, the ability of the property owner to pay and the
cooperation exhibited by the property owner. Such determination shall be
subject to appeal to the Mayor and City Council pursuant to
Chapter 2.64.
(Ord. MC-786, passed 5-21-1991; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.96.050 DUTY TO INSTALL LANDSCAPING.
   The owners of lots or portions of lots fronting on the city rights-of-way in
the specified areas whenever the city has approved the application and signed
the agreement to pay the 50% portion of the costs of the installation of such
landscape improvements in front of said part shall have the duty of
installation or causing the installation of landscaping in front of their
properties upon notice so to do by the city.
(Ord. MC-786, passed 5-21-1991)
§ 12.96.060 DUTY TO MAINTAIN AND REPAIR AFTER INSTALLATION.
   (A)   The owners of lots or portions of lots fronting on any portion of the
public right-of-way on the specified streets and arterials or in the specified
commercial zones shall, after such property is improved, maintain that property
in accordance with established city standards and in such condition that the
improved area will not endanger persons or property and maintain it in a
condition which will not interfere with the public convenience in its use.
   (B)   When the Director of Development Services finds any landscaped
frontages which are not being maintained up to city maintenance standards or
which are in condition to endanger persons or property or in condition to
interfere with the public convenience in its use, the Director of Development
Services shall notify the owners of the property fronting on that portion of
such rights-of-way to perform maintenance of the landscaped frontages.
(Ord. MC-786, passed 5-21-1991; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.96.070 SERVICE AND CONTENTS OF NOTICE TO MAINTAIN AFTER INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Notice to repair or maintain landscaping and appurtenant areas may be
given by delivering a written notice personally to the owner of the property or
to the person in possession of the property facing upon the city rights-of-way
to be maintained or by mailing a written notice to the owner of the property
thereof at his or her last known address as appears on the tax assessment rolls
of the county. Immediately upon mailing the notice, the property shall be
posted in a conspicuous place.
   (B)   The notice shall particularly specify what work is required to be
done, where standard landscape maintenance requirements may be obtained showing
how it is to be done and what materials and plants shall be used in the
maintenance improvements and shall further specify that, if the maintenance is
not commenced within 30 days after notice is given and diligently and without
interruption prosecuted to completion, the Director of Development Services
shall cause the maintenance to be done, and the cost of the same shall be
billed to the property owner. Failure to pay invoices for landscape maintenance
within 30 days shall result in a lien on the property.
   (C)   The notice shall specify the day, hour and place when the Mayor and
City Council will hear objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by
any property owner or other interested persons, but in no case shall such
hearing be sooner than ten days after giving notice. Upon the day and hour
fixed for the hearing, the Mayor and City Council shall hear and pass upon
objections or protests and their decision shall be final and conclusive.
   (D)   If the required maintenance improvements are not commenced and
prosecuted to completion with due diligence as required by the notice, the
Director of Development Services shall forthwith make the required
improvements.
(Ord. MC-786, passed 5-21-1991; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.96.080 HEARING AND ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   (A)   Upon the completion of the maintenance improvements, the Director of
Development Services shall cause notice of the cost of the maintenance
improvements to be given in the manner specified in §
12.96.060, except for posting, said notice shall specify the day, hour and
place when the Mayor and City Council will hear and pass upon a report by the
Director of Development Services of the cost of the improvements, together with
any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any property owner
liable to be assessed for the cost of such maintenance improvements and any
other interested persons. In no case shall the hearing provided for in this
section be sooner than ten days after giving of notice.
   (B)   The cost of the maintenance improvements may include administrative
expenses required for the proper coordination and functioning of the
maintenance improvements in front of the parcel as determined by the Mayor and
City Council.
   (C)   Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the Mayor and City
Council shall hear and pass upon the report of the Director of Development
Services, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any
of the property owners liable to be assessed for such maintenance improvements
and any other interested persons. Thereupon, the Mayor and City Council may
make such revision, correction or modifications in the report as it may deem
just, after which, by resolution, the report as submitted, or as revised,
corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The Mayor and City Council may
adjourn the hearings from time to time. The decisions of the Mayor and City
Council, on all protests and objections which may be made, shall be final and
conclusive.
   (D)   Upon confirmation of the above report, the Mayor and City Council may
order the notice of lien to be turned over to the accounting officer of the
city; whereupon, it shall be the duty of this officer to have the amount of the
assessment added to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the lot or
parcel of land. If the city taxes are collected by the county officials, the
notice of lien shall be delivered to the County Auditor, who shall enter the
amount thereof on the county assessment book opposite the description of the
particular property and the amount shall be collected together with all other
taxes thereon against the property. The notice of lien shall be delivered to
the County Auditor before the date fixed by law for the delivery of the
assessment book to the County Board of Equalization.
(Ord. MC-786, passed 5-21-1991; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 12.96.090 LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
   (A)   Time. No action, suit or proceeding to set aside, cancel, avoid, annul
or correct any assessment or reassessment, or to review any of the proceedings,
acts or determinations therein, or to question the validity of, or to enjoin
the collection of the assessments or reassessments or to enjoin the issuance of
bonds to represent the same, shall be maintained by any person unless such
action is commenced within 30 days after the recording of the warrant, diagram
and assessment or reassessment, and thereafter all persons shall be barred from
any such action or any defense of invalidity of the assessment or of bonds
issued thereon.
   (B)   Property unlawfully dedicated or acquired. No proceedings taken or had
under this provision shall ever be held to be invalid on the ground that the
street right-of-way, public property or any portion thereof upon which the work
or any part thereof is or was done has not been lawfully dedicated or acquired;
provided the same is lawfully dedicated or acquired, or an order for possession
prior to judgment has been obtained.
(Ord. MC-786, passed 5-21-1991)
CHAPTER 12.98: CAMPING ON PUBLIC STREETS
AND PARKS
Section
   
12.98.010   Purpose
   
12.98.020   Definitions
   
12.98.030   Unlawful camping
   
12.98.040   Storage of personal property in public places
§ 12.98.010 PURPOSE.
   The public streets and areas within the city should be readily accessible
and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for
camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of
others to use the areas for the purposes for which they were intended. The
purpose of this chapter is to maintain public streets and areas within the city
in a clean and accessible condition.
(Ord. MC-945, passed 6-20-1995)
§ 12.98.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMP. To pitch or occupy camp facilities; to live temporarily in a camp
facility or outdoors; to use camp paraphernalia.
   CAMP FACILITIES. Include, but are not limited to, tents, huts or temporary
shelters.
   CAMP PARAPHERNALIA. Includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds,
sleeping bags, hammocks or non-city-designated cooking facilities and similar
equipment.
   PARK. Means the same as defined in §
12.80.020.
   STORE. To put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put aside for
safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.
   STREET. A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular and/or pedestrian travel.
STREET includes highways.
(Ord. MC-945, passed 6-20-1995)
§ 12.98.030 UNLAWFUL CAMPING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities or use
camp paraphernalia in the following areas, except as otherwise provided:
   (A)   Any street;
   (B)   Any public parking lot or public area, improved or unimproved; and
   (C)   Any park.
(Ord. MC-945, passed 6-20-1995)
§ 12.98.040 STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property, including
camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as
otherwise provided:
   (A)   Any street;
   (B)   Any public parking lot or public area, improved or unimproved; and
   (C)   Any park.
(Ord. MC-945, passed 6-20-1995)
TITLE 13: PUBLIC UTILITIES
   Chapter
      
13.04.   WELLS
      
13.08.   CONNECTION WITH PUBLIC SEWER
      
13.12.   CROSS-CONNECTIONS AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES
      
13.16.   RESERVED
      
13.20.   GEOTHERMAL RESOURCES
      
13.24.   WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM
      
13.25.   SPREADING OR EXTRACTION WITHIN THE MANAGEMENT ZONE
      
13.28.   COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT WATER, RUBBISH, SEWER OR OTHER MUNICIPAL
UTILITY CHARGES
      
13.32.   WASTEWATER FACILITIES
      
13.36.   UNDERGROUND FACILITIES
CHAPTER 13.04: WELLS
Section
   
13.04.010   Measurement of water - records required
   
13.04.020   Record of wells that have been bored
   
13.04.030   Record-keeping requirement
§ 13.04.010 MEASUREMENT OF WATER - RECORDS REQUIRED.
   It shall be the duty of the City Board of Water Commissioners to cause
measurements to be taken of all water naturally flowing out of the San
Bernardino artesian basin and also of all water artificially taken and
transported out of the San Bernardino artesian basin or any of its tributaries;
to cause measurements to be taken of the flow of water from artesian wells in
the San Bernardino artesian basin and also the depth to water in such wells
that do not naturally flow to the surface of the ground; to cause to be taken
measurements of the pressure of water at the surface of the ground flowing from
artesian wells in the San Bernardino artesian basin; to cause to be taken
measurements of all water used in the water system of the city; to keep a
record, in the office of such Commissioners, of all measurements of water and
water pressure hereinbefore referred to; and also to keep a book in which all
persons employed in or engaged in taking any of such measurements shall record
a true copy of such measurements and the person so taking such measurements
shall be required in such book to state the time of taking such measurement and
by some proper designation the place of such measurement and when so recorded,
the person shall sign his or her name to such record.
(Ord. 677, passed 6-1-1917)
§ 13.04.020 RECORD OF WELLS THAT HAVE BEEN BORED.
   The City Board of Water Commissioners shall procure and cause to be recorded
in a proper book a true and correct log of all wells that have been bored in
the San Bernardino valley subsequent to the first day of August 1916, or that
may hereafter be bored therein.
(Ord. 677, passed 6-1-1917)
§ 13.04.030 RECORD-KEEPING REQUIREMENT.
   The City Board of Water Commissioners is authorized and directed to procure
such books necessary to preserve the records herein required of them to be
taken and kept and to do all other things and to make such rules and
regulations necessary and proper to carry this chapter into effect in order to
preserve a true record of all the matters herein referred to and in order to be
fully advised as to the condition of the water level and the flow and pressure
of water from and in wells within the San Bernardino artesian basin, and also
to preserve a true and correct record of the quantity of water being taken from
said basin and conveyed to lands not overlying the same, as well as a true and
correct record of all of the other matters hereinbefore referred to. The
measurements and other things herein provided to be taken and done shall be
taken and done at such time and in such manner as the Board of Water
Commissioners shall, from time to time, direct.
(Ord. 677, passed 6-1-1917)
CHAPTER 13.08: CONNECTION WITH PUBLIC SEWER
Section
   
13.08.010   Regulation of wastewater connections by the Water Board
   
13.08.020   Inoperative private sewer laterals
   
13.08.030   Reserved
   
13.08.040   Reserved
   
13.08.050   Reserved
   
13.08.055   Reserved
   
13.08.060   Reserved
   
13.08.070   Reserved
   
13.08.080   Reserved
   
13.08.090   Reserved
   
13.08.100   Reserved
   
13.08.105   Reserved
   
13.08.110   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   For provisions authorizing cities to construct sewers, see Cal. Gov’t Code,
§ 38900
   For provisions on sewers, see Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§ 5400 et seq.
§ 13.08.010 REGULATION OF WASTEWATER CONNECTIONS BY THE WATER BOARD .
   In accordance with § 603 of the City Charter, the Water Board shall be
responsible for oversight and management of the city’s wastewater collection
system, including the regulation of connections. Any rules or regulations
promulgated by the Water Board in connection with its powers under § 603 of the
City Charter may be enforced as laws of the city in accordance with
Chapter 2.28.
(Ord. 2158, passed 2-11-1957; Ord. 3407, passed 3-6-1974; Ord. MC-1562, passed
9-15-2021)
§ 13.08.020 INOPERATIVE PRIVATE SEWER LATERALS.
   Inoperative private sewer laterals shall be maintained in good condition
(and free of defects). Inoperative private sewer laterals constituting a
nuisance, as that term is defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 5410, shall
be subject to the regulations outlined by Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§ 5410
through 5416 and such regulations shall be enforced by the City Public Works
Department.
(Ord. 2158, passed 2-11-1957; Ord. 3835, passed 6-19-1979; Ord. MC-1562, passed
9-15-2021)
§ 13.08.030 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Eliminated by Ord. MC-1562, passed 9-15-2021)
§ 13.08.040 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Eliminated by Ord. MC-1562, passed 9-15-2021)
§ 13.08.050 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Eliminated by Ord. MC-1562, passed 9-15-2021)
§ 13.08.055 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Eliminated by Ord. MC-1562, passed 9-15-2021)
§ 13.08.060 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Eliminated by Ord. MC-1562, passed 9-15-2021)
§ 13.08.070 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Eliminated by Ord. MC-1562, passed 9-15-2021)
§ 13.08.080 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Eliminated by Ord. MC-1562, passed 9-15-2021)
§ 13.08.090 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Eliminated by Ord. MC-1562, passed 9-15-2021)
§ 13.08.100 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Eliminated by Ord. MC-1562, passed 9-15-2021)
§ 13.08.105 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Eliminated by Ord. MC-1562, passed 9-15-2021)
§ 13.08.110 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Eliminated by Ord. MC-1562, passed 9-15-2021)
CHAPTER 13.12: CROSS-CONNECTIONS AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES
Section
   
13.12.010   Compliance with chapter and other laws
   
13.12.020   Test and report of check valves, pressure vacuum breakers or
backflow prevention devices
   
13.12.030   Administration
   
13.12.040   Violation - penalty
§ 13.12.010 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER AND OTHER LAWS.
   It is unlawful for any person to install, maintain or allow to exist, or to
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with a notice correction of any cross-
connection, which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter; the
Uniform Plumbing Code, latest adopted edition; the California Administrative
Code; and other laws relating to cross-connections and backflow prevention
devices. A finding by the City Municipal Water Department or the county health
officer that a cross-connection does or may contaminate water for drinking or
domestic purposes shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2168, passed 5-7-1957; Ord. 3007, passed 8-19-1969)
§ 13.12.020 TEST AND REPORT OF CHECK VALVES, PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKERS OR
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   No person shall fail, refuse or neglect to test and report to the City
Municipal Water Department or health officer on the condition of all check
valves, double-check valves, pressure vacuum breakers or backflow prevention
devices installed to prevent contamination or pollution of drinking water
systems. Such tests, maintenance and reports shall be as required by rules
adopted by the Water Commissioners and by §
13.12.010.
(Ord. 2168, passed 5-7-1957; Ord. 3007, passed 8-19-1969)
§ 13.12.030 ADMINISTRATION.
   The agency responsible for the enforcement of this chapter shall be the City
Municipal Water Department.
(Ord. 2168, passed 5-7-1957; Ord. 3007, passed 8-19-1969)
§ 13.12.040 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed $500, or by imprisonment in the
city jail for not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this
chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided.
(Ord. 2168, passed 5-7-1957)
CHAPTER 13.16: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-950, passed 8-22-1995)
CHAPTER 13.20: GEOTHERMAL RESOURCES
Section
Article I. General Administrative Provisions
   
13.20.010   Purpose
   
13.20.020   Scope
   
13.20.030   Definitions
   
13.20.035   Altering
   
13.20.040   Applicant
   
13.20.045   Artesian flow
   
13.20.050   Artesian well
   
13.20.055   Board
   
13.20.060   BTU
   
13.20.065   By-product
   
13.20.070   City
   
13.20.075   Constructing
   
13.20.080   Council
   
13.20.085   Department
   
13.20.090   Drilling a well
   
13.20.095   Drilling site
   
13.20.100   Franchise
   
13.20.105   General Manager
   
13.20.110   Geothermal data center
   
13.20.115   Geothermal facility
   
13.20.120   Geothermal fluid
   
13.20.125   Geothermal heat
   
13.20.130   Geothermal resources
   
13.20.135   Ground water
   
13.20.140   Heat rate
   
13.20.145   Heating service
   
13.20.150   Inhabitant
   
13.20.155   Injection well
   
13.20.160   Owner
   
13.20.165   Person
   
13.20.170   Pollution
   
13.20.175   Prospect well
   
13.20.180   Secondary use
   
13.20.185   Service
   
13.20.190   Service connection
   
13.20.195   Therm
   
13.20.200   Thermal ground water
   
13.20.205   Underground reservoir
   
13.20.210   User
   
13.20.215   User service pipeline
   
13.20.220   Water well contractor and drilling machine operator
   
13.20.225   Well
   
13.20.230   Well drilling machine
   
13.20.240   Rates, fees and charges
   
13.20.250   Service map - adoption of standards
   
13.20.260   Conformity with general plan and other ordinances
   
13.20.270   Appeal of administrative decisions
Article II. City Heating Service
   
13.20.280   Administrative organizations and principal functions
   
13.20.290   Boundary
   
13.20.300   Finances
   
13.20.310   Authorized facilities and other heat sources
   
13.20.320   Improvement procedures
   
13.20.330   Service connection procedures
   
13.20.340   User service procedures
   
13.20.350   Terms and conditions of heating service
Article III. Geothermal and Ground Water Reservoir Management
   
13.20.360   Reservoir management policy
   
13.20.370   Existing wells
   
13.20.380   New wells
   
13.20.390   Injection wells
   
13.20.400   Resource data collection
   
13.20.410   City inspection and monitoring of wells and geothermal facilities
   
13.20.420   Wasteful or defective wells - repair - violation
Article IV. Private Heating Services
   
13.20.430   Establishment, services and conditions
Article V. Enforcement
   
13.20.440   Enforcement
ARTICLE I. GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
§ 13.20.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide comprehensive management of
the geothermal resources and thermal ground waters within and adjacent to the
city.
   (B)   In furtherance of this overall purpose, this chapter is specifically
intended to serve the following sub-purposes:
      (1)   Conservation and beneficial management of geothermal resources and
thermal ground waters in a comprehensive and coordinated manner, so as to
assure their continued availability and productivity;
      (2)   Continued technical assistance for individual private geothermal
resource and thermal ground water uses, including residential, commercial and
industrial activities;
      (3)   Maximization of the public welfare and economic benefit to be
derived from geothermal resources and thermal ground waters, by extending their
availability throughout the city and elsewhere as much as practical with city
and private heating services;
      (4)   Minimization of the potential for damage or degradation to
geothermal resources and thermal ground waters;
      (5)   Protection of the surface and subsurface environment during
development and utilization of geothermal resources and thermal ground waters;
      (6)   Advancement of the scientific study of geothermal resources and
thermal ground waters, through the collection and dissemination of resource
data and the demonstration of geothermal technologies;
      (7)   Implementation of the city’s general plan and its goals and
policies for geothermal development and utilization; and
      (8)   Implementation of the authority and provisions of the City Charter
and any amendments thereto; and coordinated with the provisions of the Cal.
Public Resources Code, Division 3 and Division 6, and any amendments thereto.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.020 SCOPE.
   This chapter includes general provisions for administration of this chapter;
the establishment of, and operating measures for, a city owned and operated
geothermal district heating service in the city and elsewhere; the
establishment of geothermal and thermal ground water reservoir management
procedures; and authorization for certain private geothermal heating services
which will operate independently of the city’s heating service.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter, the words,
phrases and terms set forth in this chapter shall be deemed to have the meaning
ascribed to them in §§
13.20.035 through
13.20.230.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.035 ALTERING.
   ALTERING. The deepening, recasing, perforating, reperforating, installation
of packers or seals and other material changes in the design of a well.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.040 APPLICANT.
   APPLICANT. The person making application for a geothermal heating connection
or geothermal heating service from the city under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.045 ARTESIAN FLOW.
   ARTESIAN FLOW. The water discharging to the natural ground surface if the
flow is unrestricted.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.050 ARTESIAN WELL.
   ARTESIAN WELL. A well taking water from an aquifer holding water under
pressure greater than atmospheric pressure, which causes the water to seek a
static level above the wells juncture with the aquifer.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.055 BOARD.
   BOARD. The Board of Water Commissioners of the City of San Bernardino.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.060 BTU.
   BTU. British thermal unit.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.065 BY-PRODUCT.
   BY-PRODUCT. Any mineral or minerals, exclusive of oil, hydrocarbon gas,
helium or other hydrocarbon substances, which are found in solution or in
association with geothermal resources, and which have a value of less than 75%
of the value of geothermal resources or are not, because of quantity, quality
or technical difficulties in extraction and production, of sufficient value to
warrant extraction and production by themselves.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.070 CITY.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.075 CONSTRUCTING.
   CONSTRUCTING. The boring, digging, drilling or excavating of a well,
including the installation of casing or well screens.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.080 COUNCIL.
   COUNCIL. The Mayor and City Council of the City of San Bernardino, sometimes
called “City Council.”
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.085 DEPARTMENT.
   DEPARTMENT. The City Municipal Water Department of the City of San
Bernardino.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.090 DRILLING A WELL.
   DRILLING A WELL. The drilling, re-drilling or deepening of a well.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.095 DRILLING SITE.
   DRILLING SITE. Any site where drilling operations will be, are being or have
been undertaken to construct or alter a well.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.100 FRANCHISE.
   FRANCHISE. An agreement granting a land developer authorization to
construct, operate and maintain a private heating service.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.105 GENERAL MANAGER.
   GENERAL MANAGER. Manager of the City Municipal Water Department, or the
Manager’s authorized representative, sometimes referred to herein as MANAGER.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.110 GEOTHERMAL DATA CENTER.
   GEOTHERMAL DATA CENTER. The city office which acts as a geothermal
information clearing house and data repository and is maintained in the City
Municipal Water Department.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.115 GEOTHERMAL FACILITY.
   GEOTHERMAL FACILITY. Any space or process, heating or cooling apparatus or
system used to pump, convey or transport geothermal resources or thermal ground
water, including, but not limited to, ground water heat pumps, fluid heat
exchangers, well and circulating pumps, pipelines, valves, fittings or
controls.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.120 GEOTHERMAL FLUID.
   GEOTHERMAL FLUID. Any fluid transporting or capable of transporting
geothermal heat.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.125 GEOTHERMAL HEAT.
   GEOTHERMAL HEAT. Heat derived from geothermal resources.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.130 GEOTHERMAL RESOURCES.
   GEOTHERMAL RESOURCES. The natural heat of the earth and the energy, in
whatever form, below the surface of the earth present in, resulting from or
created by, or which may be extracted from, the natural heat, and all minerals
in solution or other products obtained from naturally heated fluids, brines,
associated gases and steam, in whatever form, found below the surface of the
earth, exclusive of oil, hydrocarbon gas, helium or other hydrocarbon
substances, but including specifically:
   (A)   All products of geothermal processes, embracing indigenous steam, hot
water and hot brines;
   (B)   Steam and gases, hot water and hot brines resulting from water, gas or
other fluids artificially introduced into geothermal formations;
   (C)   Heat or other associated energy found in geothermal formations; and
   (D)   Any by-product derived from them.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.135 GROUNDWATER.
   GROUND WATER. Any water, except capillary moisture, beneath the land surface
or beneath the bed of any stream, lake, reservoir or other body of surface
water, whatever may be the geological formation or structure in which such
water stands, flows, percolates or otherwise moves.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.140 HEAT RATE.
   HEAT RATE. The user fee schedule charged by the city for geothermal heat
according to a rate schedule adopted by a resolution of the Board.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.145 HEATING SERVICE.
   HEATING SERVICE. The provision of geothermal heat by the city to a user
pursuant to the City Charter, and any amendment thereto, and the provisions of
Article II of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.150 INHABITANT.
   INHABITANT. Businesses and persons within the city.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.155 INJECTION WELL.
   INJECTION WELL. Any well or converted well constructed to dispose of
geothermal fluids or ground water into an underground reservoir.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.160 OWNER.
   OWNER. The holder of the record title to real property or the vendee under a
recorded land sale contract or any lessee having a long-term leasehold interest
in the property.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.165 PERSON.
   PERSON. An individual person, firm, partnership, association, social or
fraternal organization, corporation, non-profit corporation, trust, estate,
receiver, syndicate, branch of government or similar entities, any group or
combination acting as a unit or the successors or assigns of any of the
aforesaid.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.170 POLLUTION.
   POLLUTION. The contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical
or biological properties of any surface or ground waters which will or can
reasonably be expected to render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious
to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other
legitimate beneficial use.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.175 PROSPECT WELL.
   PROSPECT WELL. Any well constructed or altered as a geophysical test well,
seismic shot hole, mineral exploration drilling, core drilling or temperature
gradient test well, less than 2,000 feet in depth and constructed or altered
specifically in prospecting for geothermal resources.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.180 SECONDARY USE.
   SECONDARY USE. Any use which receives the city heating service from fluids
discharged by a foregoing use, prior to the return of such fluids to a city
heating service pipeline.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.185 SERVICE.
   SERVICE. See heating service (§
13.20.145).
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.190 SERVICE CONNECTION.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The part of the city heating service distribution system
which connects the city’s meter and pipeline to the user’s pipeline.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.195 THERM.
   THERM. A unit of measure consisting of 100,000 BTUs. This unit is used to
measure delivered geothermal heat for billing purposes.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.200 THERMAL GROUND WATER.
   THERMAL GROUND WATER. Ground water which is less than 250°F at bottom-hole
temperature, and possessing sufficient heat to be used for a direct thermal
application or in conjunction with a ground water heat pump for which the heat
is put to beneficial use.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.205 UNDERGROUND RESERVOIR.
   UNDERGROUND RESERVOIR. An aquifer or combination of aquifers or zones
containing a common geothermal and/or ground water resource.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.210 USER.
   USER. A person who receives or is capable of receiving geothermal heat from
the city.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.215 USER SERVICE PIPELINE.
   USER SERVICE PIPELINE. The private pipeline that connects the user’s private
heating system to the city’s meter and distribution pipeline.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.220 WATER WELL CONTRACTOR AND DRILLING MACHINE OPERATOR.
   WATER WELL CONTRACTOR AND DRILLING MACHINE OPERATOR. As defined by ordinance
or state law, and any amendment thereto.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.225 WELL.
   WELL. Any artificial opening or artificially altered natural opening,
however made, by which geothermal fluids or ground water is sought or through
which geothermal fluids or ground water flows under natural pressure or is
artificially withdrawn or is used to operate a heat exchanger within the well;
provided that this definition shall not include a natural spring.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.230 WELL DRILLING MACHINE.
   WELL DRILLING MACHINE. Any power-driven percussion, rotary, boring, digging
or augering machine used in the construction or alteration of wells.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.240 RATES, FEES AND CHARGES.
   The rates, service charges, connection fees and such other charges as
provided for by this chapter shall be established by resolution of the Board
and may be amended by resolution of the Board at any time. Rates charged may be
fixed and classified according to the type of use or the amount of geothermal
heat used or any combination thereof. Such rates, fees and charges shall not be
changed without a public hearing first being held before the Board. Such
hearing shall be advertised by published notice in a local newspaper of general
circulation not less than ten days prior to the date of such hearing, and in
the geothermal heating bills sent to users during the period of 30 days prior
to the date of the hearing. Such notices shall set forth the time and place of
the hearing and a summary of said amendment.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.250 SERVICE MAP - ADOPTION OF STANDARDS.
   (A)   San Bernardino geothermal heating service map. The locations of
heating service facilities are established on the map entitled “San Bernardino
Geothermal Heating Service Map,” as presently on file in the Geothermal Data
Center, which map is incorporated herein by reference. The map shall
hereinafter be referred to as the “heating service map,” and shall be
maintained on file in the Geothermal Data Center. Any revisions or replacement
of this map shall be approved by ordinance and shall be likewise filed and
incorporated into this chapter by reference.
   (B)   City Municipal Water Department geothermal heating user service
pipeline connection standards. Pipeline connection standards shall be
established by the General Manager.
   (C)   City Municipal Water Department standards for maintenance related
surface discharge. The General Manager may establish standards for maintenance
related surface discharges.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.260 CONFORMITY WITH GENERAL PLAN AND OTHER ORDINANCES.
   All actions pursuant to this chapter and all uses of land in conjunction
herewith shall conform to Title 19 of this code, the city’s general plan, all
other applicable code provisions and ordinances and applicable state statutes.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.270 APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.
   Any decision rendered by administrative officials of the Department pursuant
to this chapter may be appealed to the Board. Such appeal shall be in writing,
shall identify the administrative decision appealed from, the specific grounds
for appeal and shall be filed with the General Manager not more than 14 days
following the date of the notice to the affected party of the administrative
decision. The Board shall consider the appeal at its next regular meeting
following the filing of the appeal, and upon considering all pertinent
testimony and evidence, may sustain, modify or reverse the decision appealed
from. The Board shall provide a written report of its decision to the affected
party by certified mail within five days of the Board’s action.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
ARTICLE II. CITY HEATING SERVICE
§ 13.20.280 ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATIONS AND PRINCIPAL FUNCTIONS.
   (A)   Officials. The Board shall act as the governing body of the heating
service, and the General Manager shall act as the chief administrative officer
of the service.
   (B)   Assignment of organizational responsibilities. The General Manager may
delegate or assign responsibilities for heating service functions and
activities to such divisions and personnel as the General Manager may deem
appropriate or necessary.
   (C)   Principal functions and activities. The principal functions and
activities of the heating service shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   The exploration for and confirmation of geothermal resources and/or
ground waters;
      (2)   The monitoring of geothermal and/or ground water reservoirs and the
management of reservoir activities, so as to promote stable reservoir
conditions and enhance reservoir productivity;
      (3)   The supplying, furnishing and selling of geothermal heat to city
inhabitants;
      (4)   The supplying, furnishing and selling of any surplus geothermal
heat over and above the heating needs of the city to persons outside the city,
and for purposes deemed appropriate by the Board;
      (5)   The establishment and maintenance of a Geothermal Data Center,
where local geothermal information and all geothermal records authorized or
required by this chapter shall be kept and made available for public inspection
and reproduction; a registry of local wells and geothermal facilities shall be
established and maintained at the Geothermal Data Center;
      (6)   The sponsoring of and participation in the scientific study and
demonstration of geothermal resources and technologies;
      (7)   Geothermal disposal drainage work as authorized by city; and
      (8)   All other acts and things which may be requisite, necessary or
convenient in carrying out the purpose of this chapter and state law.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.290 BOUNDARY.
   (A)   Establishment. The heating service boundary shall encompass all land
within the corporate limits of the city, as now or hereafter constituted,
excluding all railroad rights-of-way pursuant to state law, unless the owner of
the railroad property expressly consents to its inclusion.
   (B)   Extension of service outside city boundary. Service shall normally be
available only to users located within the city boundary. However, the Board
may, by contract, extend service outside the boundary in cases where such
extension is deemed in the best interests of the city, but only after
determining that such service capability is based upon a surplus of geothermal
heat existing over and above any and all demands of the users within the city
boundary. Contracts for service outside the city boundary shall condition
continued service upon the continuance of the surplus over city needs.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.300 FINANCES.
   (A)   Operational financing. Heating service operations and maintenance,
within or without the city boundary, may be financed by one or more, or any
combination, of the following methods:
      (1)   Such rates, fees and charges as may be required by this chapter;
      (2)   Annual ad valorem taxation in an amount which shall not exceed the
true cash value of all taxable property within the city;
      (3)   General obligation bonds, upon authorization of the city’s voters,
in an amount which shall not exceed in the aggregate 10% of the true cash value
of all taxable property within the city; such general obligation bonds may be
additionally secured, by resolution of the Board, by pledging all or any part
of the net revenue of the city’s heating service;
      (4)   Refunding bonds, of the same character and tenor as those general
obligation bonds replaced thereby, by resolution of the Board;
      (5)   Revenue bonds pledging the gross revenues of the city’s heating
service, if approved by the Council;
      (6)   Federal and state grants-in-aid, and private endowments; and
      (7)   All other legal means.
   (B)   Improvement financing. Heating service improvements, within or without
the city boundary, and including, but not limited to, the purchase, lease or
acquisition of real estate or equipment, and the planning, design,
construction, reconstruction, extension, enlargement, purchase, lease or
acquisition of geothermal facilities, may be financed by one or more, or any
combination, of the following methods:
      (1)   Such rates, fees and charges as may be required by this chapter;
      (2)   Annual ad valorem taxation, as specified in division (A)(2) above;
      (3)   General obligation bonds, as specified in division (A)(3) above;
      (4)   Revenue bonds secured by all or any part of the heating service’s
gross revenues subject to approval of the Council; such revenue bonds shall not
be subject to the percentage limitations applicable to general obligation
bonds, but shall be payable solely from such part of the revenues of the
heating service;
      (5)   Refunding bonds, of the same character and tenor as those revenue
bonds replaced thereby, by resolution of the Council;
      (6)   Special assessments, pursuant to laws of the state, and city
procedures for local improvement districts;
      (7)   Federal and state grants-in-aid, and private endowments; and
      (8)   All other legal means.
   (C)   Special bond retirement financing. The city may, by Council
resolution, annually tax all taxable property within the city, in an amount
sufficient to pay the annual interest on general obligation bonds theretofore
issued by the city and then outstanding, together with any portion of the
principal of such bonds maturing within the year.
   (D)   Refund of certain heating pipeline extension costs. If any person is
required by the Board, to advance to the Board, the cost of extending a
geothermal heating pipeline adjacent to property other than his or her own so
that geothermal heating service is provided for such other property without
further extension of the geothermal heating pipeline, the Board shall require
the owner of the other property, prior to providing geothermal heating service
to that property, to pay to the Department a pro rata portion of the cost of
the extension, from which the Board may refund all or a portion of such funds
so advanced. The right to require shall not continue for more than ten years
after the date of installation of the extension of the geothermal heating
pipeline. The amount to be refunded shall be determined by Board resolution.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.310 AUTHORIZED FACILITIES AND OTHER HEAT SOURCES.
   (A)   Authorized facilities. In performance of the functions and activities
specified in §
13.20.280(C), the Board may plan, design, construct, acquire, lease, operate,
maintain and improve a system of geothermal facilities, which may include, but
need not be limited to, wells; heat exchangers; pumps for fluid extraction,
circulation and injection; pipelines for conveying fluids; disposal facilities;
tanks for storing fluids; fluid or heat metering devices; and various testing
instruments and system control devices.
   (B)   Other heat sources. The Board may authorize, by contract, the
Department’s purchase and distribution of heat generated by sources other than
the city’s wells, in order to supplement the city’s geothermal heat.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.320 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Authority to initiate improvement projects. Improvement projects for
the heating service shall be initiated by the Board, upon its own motion or
upon the written petition of the owners of one-half of the property that
benefits specifically by the proposed improvement. A study will be initiated by
the Board to assess economic feasibility.
   (B)   Compliance with state siting requirements. All contemplated
improvements shall comply with applicable statutes and regulations of the
state.
   (C)   Procedures for special assessments. Whenever any heating service
improvement is to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessments
according to benefits, the Board shall administer such assessment procedure in
accordance with state law and this code, and such other Board procedures
applicable to local improvement districts. Such assessments as are approved by
the Board shall be subject to confirmation by the Council.
   (D)   Means of improvements. The construction work for improvements will be
done in whole, or in part, by the Board, by a contract or by any other
governmental agency, or by any combination thereof, as authorized by the Board.
   (E)   Acquisition of private wells and geothermal facilities. As provided
for in §
13.20.300(B), the Board may purchase, lease or receive as a gift, any privately
owned wells and/or geothermal facilities within or without the city boundary,
for purposes of improving the heating services principal functions and
activities.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.330 SERVICE CONNECTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application procedure. Any person desiring to connect a user pipeline
to the city’s heating distribution pipeline, or to connect a secondary use to a
user’s discharge pipeline, may apply for such service connection with the
Department on forms provided for that purpose. The Department shall approve or
deny said application, in writing, within 14 days of its filing.
   (B)   Service connection fees. Upon approval of a service connection
application, the applicant shall remit a connection fee to the Department in an
amount to be established by resolution of the Board.
   (C)   Voiding. Failure to remit the fee in full, or otherwise comply with
fee requirements, within 14 days of the date of application approval, shall
render said approval void. The applicant shall be given written notice of such
voiding by certified mail.
   (D)   Service connection standards and inspections. All user service
pipeline connections to the heating service system, including secondary use
connections, shall be completed under procedures promulgated by the Department.
All completed and approved user service pipeline connections shall remain
inoperable, by Department deactivation of the city heat meter, until such time
as a service account is activated by the Department. All completed and approved
service connections shall be used only for the purpose expressly cited in the
connection permit; service users shall not, in any manner, otherwise connect or
divert the heat or fluid provided by the service connection. The city shall not
be liable for the materials, workmanship, operation or maintenance, relating to
the user service pipeline or to private heating or cooling equipment installed
beyond the city’s service connection.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.340 USER SERVICE PROCEDURES.
   The Board shall establish application procedures, required service deposits,
billing procedures, service charges and procedures for delinquent accounts.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.350 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF HEATING SERVICE.
   All heating services provided by the city shall be subject to the following
terms and conditions.
   (A)   Service accounts with all users outside the city boundary shall be
subject to immediate cancellation of service whenever there exists no surplus
supply, of heat over and above any and all demands of users within the city
boundary.
   (B)   The Board reserves the right to cease operation of the heating system,
or any part thereof, and cancel such services as may be provided by the system,
for reasons of emergency maintenance or repairs as authorized by the General
Manager. The General Manager shall diligently endeavor to provide user and
public notice prior to such emergency actions at the earliest time and most
comprehensive extent.
   (C)   The city may, by Board resolution, establish regular seasonal periods
of heating service operation and non-operation.
   (D)   The city shall assume no liability whatsoever, direct or implied, for
any user damages or injuries incurred as a result of heating service
interruption or cancellation, when such interruption or cancellation is due to
circumstances beyond the control of the city, or due to operational actions
authorized by this chapter.
   (E)   The city shall not warrant or guarantee the temperature or chemical
quality of the fluid delivered to users, but shall advise of the temperature or
chemical quality of the fluid delivered to the users as they occur. The city
shall not assume any liability whatsoever, direct or implied, for corrosion,
scaling or similar physical degradation of user pipelines or private heating or
cooling equipment utilized beyond each service connection.
   (F)   Force majeure: natural catastrophe, or other causes beyond the
reasonable control of the parties, which prevent the Board from providing, or
the user from accepting, any of the Board’s services covered by this chapter,
shall operate to suspend the obligations of the user and the Board during the
period required to remove such cause; provided it is immediately reported in
writing within 48 hours of specific cause.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
ARTICLE III. GEOTHERMAL AND GROUND
WATER RESERVOIR MANAGEMENT
§ 13.20.360 RESERVOIR MANAGEMENT POLICY.
   In furtherance of the purposes of this chapter, it shall be the policy of
the city, in exercise of its powers to provide for the public health, safety
and welfare, that all wells existing on the effective date of this chapter, and
those constructed or altered thereafter, be used in such a manner as to:
   (A)   Conserve and protect the geothermal fluids and ground water within and
adjacent to the city, in order to enhance reservoir productivity and benefit;
prevent wasteful extraction and disposal of geothermal fluids and thermal
ground water; prevent geothermal fluid and thermal ground water temperature
degradation; maintain stable static levels of geothermal fluids and thermal
ground waters; prevent thermal pollution of surface environs and waters; and
prevent harmful intermixing of geothermal fluids or thermal ground water with
non-thermal ground waters;
   (B)   Allow continued individual inhabitant utilization of geothermal fluids
and thermal ground water for residential, commercial, industrial and other
legitimate beneficial purposes;
   (C)   Increase and disseminate the scientific knowledge of geothermal and
ground water resources; and
   (D)   Protect the public health, safety and welfare from improperly
constructed, operated, maintained or abandoned wells.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.370 EXISTING WELLS.
   (A)   Existing wells meaning. All wells existing or under construction
within the city on the effective date of this chapter shall be known as
existing wells, and shall be subject to the requirements of this article.
   (B)   Registration of existing wells. Owners of existing wells, within and
without the city, may register their wells with the Geothermal Data Center as
soon as this chapter becomes effective. Such registration shall be voluntary
and without cost to the owner, and shall be for purposes of providing
information to the Geothermal Data Center in accordance with §
13.20.280(C)(5). Said registration shall be on forms supplied by the Geothermal
Data Center for that purpose, and may include, but not be limited to, the name
and address of the owner, specific location of the well, date of construction,
depth and diameter of the well, specifications of casing, bottom hole
temperature, static fluid or water level, type of geothermal utilization
system, accessibility for monitoring devices and disposal method, if any. The
General Manager shall direct reasonable public notice to the city’s inhabitants
at large, explaining the registration program and encouraging participation.
   (C)   Existing surface discharge elimination. In order to eliminate the
wasteful and harmful effects of thermal fluid or water surface discharges, any
well or geothermal facility discharging geothermal fluids or thermal ground
water onto the surface of the ground or into any public ditch or drainage
facility, on the effective date of this chapter, shall be brought into
conformity with all applicable environmental requirements within one year of
such effective date. The General Manager shall cause such discharging wells or
facilities to be identified by the Geothermal Data Center, and shall cause to
be offered technical assistance to affected owners during the conversion or
abandonment of such discharging wells or facilities.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.380 NEW WELLS.
   (A)   New wells meaning. All wells constructed or altered within the city
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter shall be known as new wells,
and shall be subject to the requirements of this article.
   (B)   Application for well permit. In addition to all applicable state and
federal requirements, any person, except the Board, desiring to construct,
install or alter a well within the city shall first apply for a well permit at
the Geothermal Data Center on forms provided for that purpose by the Geothermal
Data Center. Well contractors or drilling operators shall not commence
construction or alteration of a well prior to the owner of a proposed well
receiving a well permit.
   (C)   Application fee. All applications for a well permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee established by Board resolution.
   (D)   Application review. The General Manager shall review each application
to determine any potential impacts upon the city heating service; any potential
for adverse effects to the surrounding reservoir and other wells; conformity
with city plans and ordinances; and to assure registration with the Geothermal
Data Center.
   (E)   Permit decision. No later than 21 days from the date of filing a well
permit application, using the criteria contained in division (F) below, the
General Manager shall notify the applicant, by certified mail, of his or her
decision, setting forth any conditions imposed, and, if denied, the basis
thereof. Any well permit issued pursuant to this chapter is in addition to any
permits required by state and federal regulations.
   (F)   Permit decision criteria. Permit decisions pursuant to division (E)
above shall contain written findings for approval or denial which may include,
but are not limited to, the following criteria:
      (1)   The estimated hydrological impacts of the proposed wells operation
upon the reservoir and surrounding wells;
      (2)   The adequacy of provisions for environmental protection and public
safety;
      (3)   The compliance of the proposed well and its use with this chapter,
the city’s general plan and all other applicable city laws, ordinances and
regulations; and
      (4)   Such other reservoir management criteria as may be deemed directly
relevant to the proposed well or its operation.
   (G)   Appeal of permit decision. Applicants or other affected persons may
appeal the permit decision to the Board in accordance with §
13.20.270.
   (H)   Authority to attach conditions to permits. When the General Manager
determines that certain construction or operational conditions are necessary to
assure the conservation and protection of thermal ground water and/or
geothermal resources, or to assure the conservative and efficient utilization
of said water and/or resources, the General Manager may stipulate conditions
within a well permit issued according to division (E) above; such conditions
may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Restrictions on hours of well construction, with appropriate
requirements for noise muffling and waste disposal necessary to assure
compatibility with surrounding land uses;
      (2)   Well casing requirements above and beyond state requirements,
necessary for ground water and geothermal fluid protection;
      (3)   Restrictions on pumping, heat exchanging, storage and injection
operations necessary for the conservation or protection of ground waters and
geothermal fluids; and
      (4)   Requirements for scientific sampling, testing or monitoring
necessary to conserve or protect ground water or geothermal fluids, or to
determine the permitted wells impacts on such water or fluids.
   (I)   Completion inspection. Upon completion of any well construction or
alteration, but prior to any testing or commencement of regular use, the owner
shall promptly notify the Geothermal Data Center to request a well completion
inspection. Promptly after receiving such request, the Board shall cause an
inspection and written report thereof to be made for purposes of assuring
compliance with this chapter and registration with the Geothermal Data Center.
Notice of well pump testing shall be given in accordance with §
13.20.400(C).
   (J)   New surface discharges. Any well or geothermal facilities constructed
or altered after the effective date of this chapter shall be operated or
altered in such a manner as to conform with applicable environmental rules and
regulations. Surface discharges for maintenance purposes shall be conducted in
accordance with applicable environmental rules and regulations.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.390 INJECTION WELLS.
   Filing of application copy: all wells constructed, operated or maintained
for purposes of injecting geothermal fluids or ground water into the ground
shall comply with applicable state statutes and rules relating to injection.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.400 RESOURCE DATA COLLECTION.
   (A)   Annual well survey. The Geothermal Data Center, in accordance with §
13.20.280(C), shall annually mail to all registered well owners, within and
without the city, a questionnaire to update original registration information
and to document, to the extent possible, well operation characteristics of the
preceding year. Scheduling of the survey shall be determined by the General
Manager and response to it shall be voluntary. The city may issue such surveys
on a more frequent and geographically selective basis when investigating
specialized geothermal or ground water matters.
   (B)   Well-drilling data. A copy of all well logs prepared in accordance
with state or city law shall be furnished to the Geothermal Data Center within
30 days after the completion of the well construction or alteration by the well
contractor or drilling operator.
   (C)   Well maintenance or pumping notice. No less than 24 hours prior to
performing any well maintenance or maintenance-related well pumping within the
city, the person performing said work shall notify, telephonically or by
written or personal message, the Geothermal Data Center. Such notification
shall include, but need not be limited to, the nature of maintenance or pumping
to be performed, well location, name of owner and the approximate duration of
the work. Notice of maintenance necessary for emergency reasons for which
advance notice was impossible may be given to the Geothermal Data Center as
soon as such emergency conditions will reasonably permit.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.410 CITY INSPECTION AND MONITORING OF WELLS AND GEOTHERMAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   In connection with the principal functions and activities of the city
heating service, Board officials may enter upon any property within the city
for purposes of inspecting wells and geothermal facilities, or monitoring the
operational characteristics of such wells and facilities, when such inspection
and monitoring is reasonably necessary to the assessment of ground water or
geothermal fluid temperatures, chemistry, static levels, quantities and
movements; the assessment of land subsidence or erosion; or the assessment of
other indices related to geothermal or ground water reservoir management, or
protection of the public safety and welfare.
   (B)   The Board shall provide affected property owners with reasonable prior
notice of any intended inspection or monitoring, describing the nature, purpose
and duration of the necessary inspection or monitoring; such inspections or
monitoring shall be conducted in accordance with applicable city and state
procedures for inspection warrants, if the land owner or other person in
possession objects to any such inspection or monitoring.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
§ 13.20.420 WASTEFUL OR DEFECTIVE WELLS - REPAIR - VIOLATION.
   Whenever the General Manager determines that any well within the city is, by
nature of its construction, installation or operation, causing wasteful use of
thermal ground water or geothermal fluids, or is adversely interfering with
other wells, or is polluting ground water or surface water, the General Manager
shall promptly notify the affected owner, by certified mail, of the wasteful or
defective well, and require said owner to repair or adjust the well within 60
days. It is unlawful to fail to repair a well or to continue a wasteful or
defective operation after expiration of the 60 days following notification. Any
violation of this section is an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is
punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
ARTICLE IV. PRIVATE HEATING SERVICES
§ 13.20.430 ESTABLISHMENT, SERVICES AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Authorization for establishment. The Board may, by resolution,
authorize the establishment and operation of private geothermal heating
services within the city boundary upon application therefor by any person. Such
application shall be in a manner and form prescribed by and filed with the
General Manager.
   (B)   Authorized services. Private heating services may provide geothermal
heating, when specifically authorized by the Board, for the following uses:
      (1)   Less than six structures, excepting structures containing accessory
uses, as such uses are defined in Title 19; and
      (2)   Six or more structures in new land developments whose developers
have also been granted a franchise by the Board for the construction, operation
and maintenance of a private heating service. Such franchise shall be
individually negotiated between the Board and the developer; however, any such
franchise shall contain the following minimum provisions: the franchise shall
be for no longer than 20 years; the franchise shall require that such land
developer compensate the Board annually with a franchise fee in an amount to be
negotiated; and that such franchised geothermal heating systems shall be
subject to board acquisition at depreciated fair market value upon the
expiration of the franchise.
   (C)   Conditions of authorization. All private heating services authorized
by the Board shall be subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   All private heating service plans, improvements, construction,
facilities, operations, maintenance and scientific research shall comply with
Title 19, this chapter and all other applicable city ordinances;
      (2)   All private heating service properties and facilities shall be
subject to Board inspection in accordance with §
13.20.410; and
      (3)   All private heating services shall maintain and make available for
board inspection, such operational and maintenance records as may be stipulated
by the Board at the time of authorization.
   (D)   Private heating service facility standards. Private heating service
facility standards and improvement plans, including, but not limited to, wells,
pumps, pipelines, storage tanks, fittings and control devices, shall be
approved in writing by the General Manager, prior to their acquisition,
construction, installation or operation.
   (E)   State jurisdiction. Board authorization shall not relieve private
heating services from requirements which may be imposed upon public utility or
private heating services by state statutes or rules.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983)
ARTICLE V. ENFORCEMENT
§ 13.20.440 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Responsible official. The General Manager, or his or her authorized
representative, shall be responsible for enforcing this chapter.
   (B)   Violations. Any person violating any provision of this chapter is
guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
   (C)   Equity. In addition to any other remedies provided by law, the Board,
or its authorized representative acting for and on behalf of the Council, may
institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate proceedings
to prevent or temporarily or permanently enjoin or abate the violation of any
provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   User non-compliance. In addition to other enforcement measures
provided by this chapter, the Board may discontinue heating service to any user
who fails to comply with provisions of this chapter after 14-day written notice
to comply, sent by certified mail to said user. Said notice shall include an
explanation of the Board’s intent to discontinue service, and shall offer the
user an administrative hearing before an authorized Board representative in
order to resolve the dispute. If no hearing is requested, or if the hearing
fails to resolve the dispute, the Department may proceed to discontinue service
as scheduled.
(Ord. MC-298, passed 8-17-1983; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 13.24: WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM
[Reserved]
Editor’s note:
   In accordance with §
603 of the City Charter, the Water Board shall be responsible for oversight and
management of the city’s water supply, including the regulation of water
facilities. Any rules or regulations promulgated by the Water Board in
connection with its powers under §
603 of the City Charter may be enforced as laws of the city in accordance with
Chapter 2.28 of this municipal code.
CHAPTER 13.25: SPREADING OR EXTRACTION WITH THE MANAGEMENT ZONE
Section
   
13.25.010   Purpose
   
13.25.015   Background pertaining to Newmark ground water contamination
superfund site
   
13.25.020   Definitions
   
13.25.025   Permits
   
13.25.035   Approval of permits
   
13.25.040   Reporting
   
13.25.045   Revocation and emergency powers
   
13.25.047   Interference by existing wells with consent decree or SOW
   
13.25.050   Consent orders
   
13.25.055   Cease and desist orders
   
13.25.060   Hearing procedures and appeals
   
13.25.070   Violations, remedies and penalties
   
Appendix A: Exhibits
§ 13.25.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to assure that activities occurring in
the management zone, including, but not limited to, development, digging,
drilling, boring or reconstruction of wells; extraction of ground water from
wells; and spreading of water do not interfere with or cause pass through of
contaminants from the Newmark and Muscoy Operable Units. Activities, such as
well construction or reconstruction or artificial recharge undertaken in the
management zone, shall not cause or contribute to the migration of ground water
contaminants from the Newmark and Muscoy Operable Units to uncontaminated
areas, nor shall such activities, even at their maximum operation, interfere
with or adversely affect the integrity of the Newmark or Muscoy extraction and
treatment systems, nor shall they otherwise interfere with the performance of
these interim remedial actions at the Newmark and Muscoy Operable Units.
   (B)   It is the further purpose of this chapter to assure the protection of
human health and the environment, and compliance with relevant federal and
state requirements directly associated with the performance of the remedy. It
is the further purpose of this chapter to manage the spreading of water within
the management zone and manage the development, digging, drilling, boring,
reconstruction of wells and extraction of ground water from wells; to assure
compliance with the remedial program set forth in the RODs, consent decree and
statement of work, as defined below; and aid in the eventual restoration of the
aquifer to beneficial use.
   (C)   It is the further intent of this chapter to regulate activities within
the management zone only to the extent necessary to achieve the purposes set
forth and to minimize the regulatory impacts to those intending to spread water
or develop ground water resources in the management zone. In addition to any
other requirements of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply to
the management zone. Nothing contained herein shall exclude compliance with the
other provisions of this chapter. In the event of any conflict between the
provisions of this chapter and any other chapter, the terms and provisions of
this chapter shall apply.
§ 13.25.015 BACKGROUND PERTAINING TO NEWMARK GROUND WATER CONTAMINATION
SUPERFUND SITE.
   Background:
   (A)   In 1980, the state performed sampling of certain wells belonging to
the City Municipal Water Department (“SBMWD”). These samples disclosed the
presence of various contaminants, including trichloroethylene (“TCE”) and
perchloroethylene (“PCE”).
   (B)   Pursuant to § 105 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act (“CERCLA”), 42 U.S.C. § 9605, the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) placed the Newmark Ground Water
Contamination Superfund Site (“site”) on the National Priorities List (“NPL”),
as set forth in 40 C.F.R. pt. 300, Appendix B, by publication in the Federal
Register on March 31, 1989, 54 Fed. Reg. 13296, 13301.
   (C)   In late 1990, EPA commenced a remedial investigation (“RI”) focusing
on the Newmark Operable Unit (“OU”). In September 1992, EPA expanded the RI to
include the Muscoy OU.
   (D)   In March 1993, EPA published notice of the completion of the
feasibility study (“FS”) and the proposed plan for interim remedial action
pertaining to the Newmark OU. In December 1994, EPA published notice of the
completion of the FS and proposed plan for interim remedial action pertaining
to the Muscoy OU.
   (E)   EPA’s determinations concerning the interim remedial actions to be
implemented at the site are set forth in the Newmark OU record of decision
(“ROD”), signed August 4, 1993, and Muscoy ROD signed March 24, 1995 and the
explanation of significant differences (“ESD”) signed on August 18, 2004.
   (F)   On September 18, 1995, EPA, the state and SBMWD entered into a
cooperative agreement providing, in part, for SBMWD to perform the operation
and maintenance (“O&M”) of the remedial action set forth in the RODs, and for
EPA to fund the O&M.
   (G)   In September 1996, the SBMWD commenced an action against the United
States Army, pursuant to §§ 107 and 113 of CERCLA, seeking to obtain its costs
for response and the operation and maintenance of the Newmark and Muscoy OUs
(City of San Bernardino v. United States of America, Dept. of the Army, et al.
USDC Case No. CV 96-5205 MRP (JGx) consolidated with USDC Case No. CV 96-8867
MRP (JGx)).
   (H)   Commencing in June 2000, SBMWD, State Department of Toxic Substance
Control (“DTSC”) and EPA commenced negotiations to resolve various issues
relating to the site OU, Newmark OU and Muscoy OU. On March 23, 2005, the
consent decree memorializing the settlement was entered by the court.
   (I)   The consent decree requires, in part, for the city to implement an
ordinance providing for protection and management of the interim remedy set
forth in the RODs and ESD and specifically for the city to regulate the
spreading and extraction of water from the Bunker Hill Basin within the city in
order to prevent or correct spreading practices or extraction operations that
could interfere with or interrupt or degrade the performance of the interim
remedy.
   (J)   The protection of ground water resources within the city is of utmost
importance to the city and SBMWD. The public health, safety and general welfare
of the people of the state and of the more than 600,000 residents of the
Counties of San Bernardino and Riverside, who depend upon the continued
availability of potable ground water from the Bunker Hill Basin, is paramount.
The public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the state and
the residents of the city require assurance that spreading of water and
extraction of ground water do not interrupt or interfere with the construction,
operation and maintenance of the interim remedy or degrade the performance of
the interim remedy.
   (K)   The interim remedy requires, in part, the extraction of contaminated
ground water from the Bunker Hill Water Basin, and within the Newmark and
Muscoy OUs, and treatment of the ground water to meet all state and federal
permits and requirements for drinking water and delivery of treated water to
SBMWD for distribution to the public through its potable water system, or in
the alternative, for recharge to the aquifer.
   (L)   The inhibitor wells are located at the downgradient end of the
management zone. The inhibitor wells currently in place were designed to
function based upon hydrological factors relating to the flow of water through
the basin. The rate of flow through the basin may increase when additional
spreading occurs at spreading basins located upgradient from the inhibitor
wells. Another factor affecting flow rate is the amount of water flowing
through the basin and either extracted or flowing out of the basin. When
extraction of ground water occurs downgradient or to the side of management
zone, or the capacity of existing downgradient or adjacent wells are increased,
the rate of flow may increase. Should an increase in the flow of water occur
beyond the capacity of the inhibitor wells, the inhibitor wells may not be able
to contain and extract the additional contaminated water before it enters the
aquifer downgradient from the inhibitor wells.
   (M)   As required by the consent decree, the city must exercise its police
power to protect the public welfare of the city by adopting reasonable
regulatory measures.
§ 13.25.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVERSE EFFECT and ADVERSELY EFFECT. Any proposed new or reconstructed well,
or any water spreading (artificial recharge) activity, forecast to reduce
particle capture (as measured using predictive particle tracking) below 95% at
any time in the proposed future permit term, shall be presumed to have an
adverse effect under this chapter. This presumption may be rebutted by project
re-design or mitigation measures to restore particle capture percentages, over
a hydrologic cycle representative of long-term hydrology and extending for a
term at least as long as a proposed permit term, to at least 95% at all times,
with the proposed project operating at the full permitted capacity for the life
of the proposed project.
   APPLICANT. The person or entity submitting the application addressed in this
chapter. The term APPLICANT shall also include the person or entity granted any
permit or permission pursuant to the terms of this chapter, and shall also
include all licensees, lessees, agents, contractors, operators, employees,
officers, directors, representatives, attorneys, successors, assigns, heirs and
other persons or entities exercising the rights of the permit through
applicant. The term APPLICANT shall not include a party to the ICGMP that is
exempt from the provisions of this chapter as provided in §
13.25.025(G).
   AQUIFER. A geologic formation that stores, transmits and yields significant
quantities of water to wells and springs.
   BARRIER WELL. See INHIBITOR WELL below.
   BASIN. The Bunker Hill Basin.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino.
   CODE. The San Bernardino Municipal Code.
   CONTAMINATION. Any impairment in the quality of water of the city by wastes
or other degrading elements in amounts or concentrations violating any federal
or state drinking water standard or applicable permit limit for the water
produced by the interim remedy, or otherwise.
   DAY. A calendar day.
   DEPARTMENT. The City Municipal Water Department.
   DOHS. State of California Department of Health Services.
   DTSC. State of California Department of Toxic Substance Control.
   EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   EXTRACTION. The process of taking water from the ground water aquifer by way
of wells and other appurtenances.
   FS. The feasibility studies performed by EPA for the site and completed in
March 1993 and December 1994.
   GENERAL MANAGER. The City Municipal Water Department General Manager, or
designee.
   GROUND WATER. All water beneath the surface of the earth within the zone
below the water table in which the soil is saturated with water.
   GROUND WATER MODEL or MODEL. The mathematical calculations required to be
produced pursuant to the consent decree and SOW addressing the physical
characteristics of the ground water in the Bunker Hill Basin under various
conditions. The ground water model is a three-dimensional numerical model that
will account for changes in water levels over time, and will account for
spatial variations in underground hydrologic parameters. The GROUND WATER MODEL
can be used to perform predictive particle tracking by simulating future ground
water levels in three dimensions over time.
   INHIBITOR WELL. The wells designed by EPA for the extraction of water from
specific areas of the basin and identified in the RODs.
   MANAGEMENT ZONE. The geographic area depicted and defined on Exhibit A and
Exhibit B, on file in the office of the General Manager of SBMWD. The
“management zone” is referred to in the consent decree as the “permit zone.”
   MITIGATION MEASURES. Readily enforceable and verifiable steps taken to
reduce or eliminate adverse effects forecast for a proposed new or
reconstructed well or water spreading (artificial recharge) project by
predictive particle tracking. MITIGATION MEASURES can include, but are not
limited to:
      (1)   Locating an additional well or wells in the contaminant plume to
counteract migration of contaminants past the inhibitor wells;
      (2)   Readily enforceable and verifiable pumping restrictions; and
      (3)   Physical reductions in the size of well equipment to limit the well
capacity.
   NPL. National Priorities List.
   OU. Operable Unit.
   PERSON. Any state or local government agency, private corporation, firm,
partnership, individual, group of individuals, organization, association or, to
the extent authorized by law, any federal agency.
   PREDICTIVE PARTICLE TRACKING. The use of the ground water model, with the
inhibitor wells operating at a design rate under the SOW, over a representative
hydrologic cycle, including representative wet and dry periods for the Bunker
Hill Basin, to determine the percentage of particle capture achieved at all
times over the life of the proposed project, including any applicable
mitigation measures or project re-design, with the proposed project operating
at full permitted capacity for the entire permit term.
   PROJECT RE-DESIGN. Verifiable and enforceable changes in the physical
design, equipment or location or volume of a proposed water spreading
(artificial recharge) or new or reconstructed well project intended to reduce
or eliminate adverse effects forecast for a project evaluated with predictive
particle tracking.
   RI. The remedial investigations performed at the site for the Newmark
Operable Unit and the Muscoy Operable Unit.
   RECORD OF DECISION or ROD. The record of decision for the Newmark Operable
Unit signed August 4, 1993 and the record of decision for the Muscoy Operable
Unit signed March 24, 1995 setting forth the provisions of the interim remedy
to be implemented in addressing the contamination identified in RI/FS.
   REMEDY or INTERIM REMEDY. The course of action set forth in the RODs,
statement of work (“SOW”) and consent decree (“CD”) relating to the operation
and maintenance of the remedial action specified in said documents.
   SBMWD. The City Municipal Water Department.
   SITE. The Newmark Ground water Contamination site identified in 40 C.F.R.
pt. 3rd Appendix B, published in the Federal Register on March 31, 1989, 54
Fed. Reg. 13296, 13301.
   SPREADING BASIN. Areas, facilities and portions of land set aside for the
deposit of water with the intent to allow the water to percolate into the
ground water basin, as depicted on Exhibit C in Appendix A, attached hereto and
incorporated by this reference and on file in the office of the General Manager
of SBMWD.
   STATEMENT OF WORK (“SOW”). The document incorporated into the consent
decree, referenced in §
13.25.015(H), setting forth the implementation of the remedial action to be
performed by SBMWD, EPA and DTSC relating to the Newmark OU and Muscoy OU.
   WELL or WATER WELL. Any artificial excavation constructed by any method for
the purpose of extracting water from, or injecting water into the ground. This
definition shall not include:
      (1)   Oil or gas wells, or geothermal wells constructed under the
jurisdiction of the State Department of Conservation, except those wells
converted to use as water wells; or
      (2)   Wells used for the purpose of:
         (a)   Dewatering excavation during construction; or
         (b)   Stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments.
§ 13.25.025 PERMITS.
   (A)   Spreading. Unless a permit issued by SBMWD pursuant to this chapter is
first obtained, it shall be unlawful for any person, as principal, agent or
employee, to spread water (artificial recharge) within the management zone.
   (B)   Ground water extraction. Unless a permit issued by SBMWD pursuant to
this chapter is first obtained, it shall be unlawful for any person to develop,
dig or drill a new well, or to reconstruct an existing well in a manner to
increase its maximum capacity over its maximum capacity on March 23, 2005, or
the most recent operation if the well was inoperable on March 23, 2005, or to
allow the development, digging, drilling or reconstruction of any well on land
located within the management zone.
   (C)   Application for permit. An application for a permit shall be filed by
the landowner or the applicant with the SBMWD on a form provided by SBMWD. The
applicant has an affirmative duty to provide accurate representations of all
material facts in the application.
   (D)   Contents of application for permit for extraction. The contents of the
application for permit for extraction shall include, as a minimum, all of the
items set forth in § 13.24.250 and the elevations of proposed screening
intervals, and such other information as SBMWD determines necessary and
appropriate to evaluate the application and assure that the proposed extraction
will not interfere with, compromise, endanger or detrimentally or adversely
affect the interim remedy or otherwise cause or contribute to the movement of
contaminants to areas downgradient of the inhibitor wells, or increase the
likelihood that contaminants will migrate past or around these wells, or
interfere with or adversely affect the interim remedy.
   (E)   Contents of application for permit for spreading. The contents of the
application for permit for spreading shall include, as a minimum, the name of
the person proposing to conduct the spreading; the time period over which the
spreading is proposed to occur; the volume, location and such other information
as SBMWD may determine necessary and appropriate to evaluate the application
and assure the proposed spreading will not interfere with, compromise, endanger
or detrimentally affect the interim remedy or otherwise cause or contribute to
the movement of contaminants to areas downgradient of the inhibitor wells.
   (F)   Fees. SBMWD may levy a fee for review of the application for permit
and monitoring of compliance with the permit. The fee shall be established by
resolution of the SBMWD Board of Water Commissioners.
   (G)   Exemption from permit and related requirements for institutional
controls ground water management program (“ICGMP”) members. By agreement
effective January 1, 2005, a number of local water agencies have entered into
the agreement entitled “Agreement to Develop and Adopt an Institutional
Controls Ground Water Management Program.” That program currently provides for
short-term restrictions on production and spreading to protect the interim
remedy while a long-term agreement is negotiated. The long-term agreement will
be as protective of the interim remedy as this chapter, and projects which are
subject to the ICGMP or successors to that agreement will be reviewed and
approved by the ICGMP parties pursuant to those agreements. As long as a party
proposing to construct or reconstruct a well or to spread water for artificial
recharge is a member in good standing of the ICGMP under the agreement
effective January 1, 2005, or successors to that agreement, that party’s
project(s) will be exempt from the provisions of this chapter and will be
reviewed and approved pursuant to the ICGMP or successors to that agreement
rather than this chapter. Compliance with ICGMP requirements shall be deemed to
be full compliance with this chapter. Non-compliance with ICGMP requirements
shall be addressed pursuant to remedies provided for in the ICGMP agreement or
successors to it. In the event the ICGMP expires or lapses while this chapter
is in force, or a party with an approved spreading or well project withdraws
from the ICGMP, any mitigation measures, project re-design measures, access and
monitoring requirements and parallel undertakings imposed or agreed to by the
party under the ICGMP shall become fully enforceable by the city under this
chapter.
   (H)   Review of application.
      (1)   The review process of the application will commence when SBMWD
determines it has received from the applicant all documents and necessary
information to commence its review.
      (2)   Subject to timely participation by EPA and DTSC, SBMWD shall
endeavor to complete the review within 120 days from notice by SBMWD to
applicant that the application is deemed complete.
      (3)   The completed application shall be subject to review and comment by
the EPA and DTSC. SBMWD shall provide to EPA and DTSC a copy of its proposed
decision, after which EPA and DTSC, pursuant to the consent decree, shall have
a minimum of 30 days to comment on the proposed decision. If either EPA or DTSC
object, in writing, to the permit application, proposed decision or modeling
work on which a proposed permit decision is based, the SBMWD, EPA and DTSC
shall consult for up to 60 days in order to resolve any material differences
among them over such matters. Consistent with the consent decree, the SBMWD
shall not issue a permit over the unresolved objections of either EPA or DTSC.
      (4)   Except as provided below, applications shall be evaluated using the
predictive particle tracking in order to determine if there is an adverse
effect. Once approved by EPA, the ground water model will be used for
predictive particle tracking, to forecast particle capture through a hydrologic
cycle reasonably representative of long-term hydrology lasting for at least the
proposed permit term, which hydrologic cycle shall include a wet cycle and a
dry cycle, based on historic hydrologic data for similar periods, and which
shall assume that the inhibitor wells are operated at design rates. Mitigation
measures and any project re-design are to be evaluated using the same method.
No proposed well construction or reconstruction, or future spreading operation,
shall be approved if the project is forecast to have an adverse effect unless
such adverse effect is eliminated through readily enforceable mitigation
measures or project re-design.
   (I)   Permit applications for extraction wells in plume areas and for
irrigation use on overlying land.
      (1)   Applications to drill in the areas shown on the attached map,
Exhibit C in Appendix A to this chapter, are strongly encouraged. The
boundaries of these areas correspond to the city’s estimates of areas within
the Newmark and Muscoy contaminant plumes where extraction and treatment of
water from these areas will slow the spread of contaminants.
      (2)   (a)   For wells proposed in the designated areas shown in the map,
the applicant and the city may use a streamlined modeling process, to be
developed by the city, to model the projected hydraulic impacts of the proposed
extraction well in the proposed location upon the operations of the inhibitor
wells.
         (b)   Such application shall clearly demonstrate that:
            1.   The well will conform to standards for structural integrity;
            2.   The water it produces will be properly treated; and
            3.   The well is screened at a depth and in such a manner that its
construction and operation will not cause the migration of contaminants between
different confined intervals of the aquifer.
      (3)   The city shall set the permit term for such wells in the designated
areas for not less than 15 years, with the option, in the city’s discretion, to
set the permit term for up to 30 years.
      (4)   Wells used by overlying landowners solely for non-potable
irrigation or solely for sand and gravel operations on such land may be
replaced on the same parcel without a permit under this chapter provided that
no such overlying landowner shall extract more than 250 acre feet per year from
the same or contiguous parcels without a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter.
      (5)   (a)   The city recognizes that the wells listed in Exhibit D in
Appendix A by assessor parcel number (“APN”) have been used by the overlying
landowners solely for non-potable irrigation on such land.
         (b)   These landowners may replace these wells on these properties
without making the modeling demonstration required by this chapter provided
that such applications clearly demonstrate that:
            1.   The water it produces will continue to be used only for non-
potable irrigation or sand and gravel operations on the land, or contiguous
parcels of the same landowner, where the well is located;
            2.   The well is constructed and screened in such a manner that it
will not cause migration of contaminants between different confined intervals
of the aquifer; provided, however, that if the replacement well is screened in
substantially the same interval as the well it replaces, the replacement well
shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of compliance with this
condition; and
            3.   That extractions shall not increase by more than 25% over the
maximum annual production and extraction rates for the last ten years, as shown
by contemporaneous documentary evidence or by an edison pump test and review of
electrical consumption.
§ 13.25.035 APPROVAL OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Standard of review. Except as provided above, a permit may be granted
for a period of up to 15 years with or without conditions under the provisions
of this chapter only if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed extraction
or spreading and method of operation is not forecast to cause an adverse effect
when evaluated using the predictive particle tracking, and will not interfere
with, compromise, endanger or detrimentally affect the interim remedy, or cause
the city to be in potential violation or non-conformance with the SOW, consent
decree or RODs, or EPA or DTSC approved plans adopted thereunder.
      (1)   Prior to the completion of an updated ground water model, the
applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating, through the use of
engineering and other satisfactory scientific data, that the proposed
extraction or spreading will not cause an adverse effect and will not interfere
with, compromise, endanger or detrimentally affect the interim remedy.
      (2)   After an updated model has been completed, the applicant shall bear
the burden of demonstrating through the use of the predictive particle tracking
and other satisfactory scientific evidence that the proposed extraction or
spreading is not forecast to cause an adverse effect, and will not interfere
with, compromise, endanger or detrimentally affect the interim remedy.
   (B)   Conditions of approval.
      (1)   In the event the application is approved, EPA, DTSC and SBMWD shall
have the right to condition approval upon mitigation measures, project re-
design or other remedial activities to be performed by applicant. EPA, DTSC or
SBMWD may require the applicant to prepare a mitigation or remedial plan,
subject to approval by EPA, DTSC and SBMWD, prior to issuance of the permit.
      (2)   If mitigation measures, project re-design or remedial activities
are required as a condition of the issuance of a permit, SBMWD may require
applicant to post a bond of sufficient value to assure compliance with the
mitigation or remedial activities.
      (3)   Upon approval of the application, with or without mitigation
measures, project re-design or remedial activities, and after the posting of a
bond, if required, SBMWD shall issue a permit.
      (4)   The approval and issuance of a permit shall be subject, at all
times, to the monitoring of applicant’s activities and suspension or revocation
of the permit if it is determined by SBMWD, EPA or DTSC that applicant’s
activities interfere with, compromise, endanger or detrimentally affect the
interim remedy.
      (5)   The issuance of a permit shall be conditioned on the grant to EPA,
DTSC and the city, including SBMWD, their contractors and representatives, of
access to the wells or spreading basins or related areas for the purpose of
verifying compliance with the permit, and upon reasonable notice to inspect and
copy documents and records of applicant’s operations of the permitted
facilities.
      (6)   Misrepresentation or failure to disclose material facts in the
application shall be grounds for denial of the application.
      (7)   The approval and issuance of a permit shall be conditioned upon
applicant indemnifying, defending and holding city and SBMWD harmless from any
and all claims, causes of action, injury to person or property and enforcement
proceedings arising from or related to the application for permit, property
subject to the permit, work to be undertaken relating to the permitted
property, including work not the subject of the permit or any other matter
related to the permit or granting of the permit, including, but not limited to,
any costs incurred by SBMWD or the city from any contest to the issuance of the
permit.
   (C)   Denial of application. SBMWD shall deny the application if it
determines that the standards of this chapter have not been attained or if
either SBMWD, EPA or DTSC determines that the proposed project is forecast to
cause an adverse effect which is not eliminated by mitigation measures or
project re-design or will interfere with or adversely affect the integrity of
the Newmark and Muscoy extraction and treatment systems, or will increase the
likelihood that contaminants will migrate past or around the barrier walls that
are part of those systems or will otherwise interfere with the performance of
the interim remedial actions, or cause the city to be in potential violation or
non-conformance with the SOW, consent decree or RODs, or any plan approved by
EPA or DTSC in order to implement those documents. SBMWD shall provide to
applicant a copy of the written objections made together with any additional
written statement of reasons by EPA, DTSC and/or SBMWD for disapproval of the
permit. An applicant denied a permit may appeal the decision pursuant to §
13.25.060.
§ 13.25.040 REPORTING.
   (A)   Reporting by applicants. A condition of each and every permit shall be
the requirement that the applicant provide, at least quarterly, regular written
reports to SBMWD of water levels, chemistry and other information affecting
water quality deemed appropriate by SBMWD. The SBMWD may specify forms for such
reports and such forms shall be used by applicant to comply with the provisions
of this section. Such reports shall require applicant to perform monitoring,
sampling and record-keeping of any wells that are the subject of the permit,
including the amount, rate and timing of extraction or spreading and the
quality of water being extracted or spread, including, but not limited to,
concentrations of perchloroethylene (“PCE”), trichloroethylene (“TCE”), freon
and other water quality related concentrations, specified by SBMWD. Upon
receipt of any report requested or required by this chapter, SBMWD may require
a follow-up report of additional data and/or information. Applicant shall keep
records of all activities relating to the operation of wells and/or spreading
activities, including all sampling results and flow data. Such records shall be
available for inspection and copying by SBMWD, EPA and DTSC upon 48 hours’
notice. These records shall be maintained for a period of not less than five
years. The period for retention of records shall automatically be extended for
any period of litigation between SBMWD, the city, EPA and/or DTSC and the
applicant.
   (B)   Reporting by non-applicants. Every person, except parties to the ICGMP
described in §
13.25.025(G), spreading or extracting more than 250 acre-feet in any month,
shall report the amount of such spreading or extraction to the city within 90
days of the close of the calendar year quarter in which such spreading or
extraction occurred. Said report shall be submitted under penalty of perjury.
The SBMWD may specify forms for such reports and such reports shall be used to
comply with the provisions of this section.
§ 13.25.045 REVOCATION AND EMERGENCY POWERS.
   (A)   If there is an immediate and serious threat to the interim remedy, and
its performance in accordance with the SOW, consent decree or RODs, and if
SBMWD believes it may be due in whole or in part to applicant’s operations,
SBMWD may order the applicant to cease or reduce its operations and show cause
why the permit should not be revoked, modified or restricted.
   (B)   In addition to the provisions set forth above, the permit may be
revoked upon the determination of the SBMWD General Manager of any of the
following:
      (1)   Misrepresentation or failure to disclose material facts in the
application;
      (2)   Falsifying or making misrepresentations on any reports submitted to
SBMWD, whether as part of the application, as a condition of the permit or as
submitted voluntarily by the applicant;
      (3)   Tampering with monitoring equipment subject to the permit;
      (4)   Refusing or obstructing SBMWD, or its designee, or EPA or DTSC, or
their designees’, timely access to the permitted sites and operations, and
records of those operations;
      (5)   Failure to pay fines;
      (6)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (7)   Failure to comply with conditions of approval; and
      (8)   Failure to file timely reports or to respond to requests for
reports, sampling data, monitoring activities or cooperation with the interim
remedy for the Newmark Superfund Site.
   (C)   In the event the activities of the applicant, or applicant’s agents,
contractors, licensees, lessees or employees are deemed by SBMWD to interfere
with or adversely affect the integrity of the Newmark and Muscoy extraction and
treatment systems, or will increase the likelihood that contaminants will
migrate past or around the barrier wells that are part of those systems or will
otherwise interfere with the performance of the interim remedy, SBMWD may
revoke or suspend the permit and compel applicant to cease all activities
covered by the permit until either a hearing is held before the Board of Water
Commissioners, pursuant to §
13.25.060, for applicant to demonstrate why the permit should not be modified
or revoked, or the applicant and the General Manager reach a mutually
acceptable resolution. In all other circumstances, the applicant shall be
advised in writing of any non-compliance with the permit or other condition
that may warrant a modification of permit conditions or revocation of the
permit, and the applicant shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing
before the Board of Water Commissioners, pursuant to the provisions of §
13.25.060, to present any evidence as to why the permit should not be modified
or revoked.
§ 13.25.047 INTERFERENCE BY EXISTING WELLS WITH CONSENT DECREE OR SOW.
   In the event an existing well, not subject to the permit requirements of
this chapter, is operated in a manner which materially interferes with the
city’s compliance with the provisions of the consent decree or SOW, or requires
an increase in operating rates above design rate in order to maintain
compliance with the requirements of the consent decree or SOW, the city may
halt, abate or reduce such activities by injunction from the County Superior
Court, or by the United States District Court for the Central District of
California, acting pursuant to the United States District Court’s retention of
jurisdiction over institutional controls in paragraph 1.b, page 11, lines 6
through 19 of the consent decree. This provision is in addition to, and not in
derogation of, the city’s other statutory, equitable and common law remedies.
§ 13.25.050 CONSENT ORDERS.
   The SBMWD may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance
or similar arrangements establishing an agreement with any person responsible
for non-compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such arrangements will
include specific action to be taken by the person to correct any non-compliance
and shall be enforceable in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 13.25.055 CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
   If SBMWD finds that a person has violated any provision of this chapter, or
a permit, or the person’s activities pose an immediate and serious threat to
the interim remedy, and that it is likely the person will continue with such
violation or detrimental activities, SBMWD may issue an administrative order
directing such person immediately to cease and desist from such conduct and to
take all actions necessary to comply fully with the order. If the person fails
immediately to comply with such an administrative order, that person shall be
subject to criminal and civil liability in addition to whatever civil liability
the person may have been subject to as a result of the conduct that prompted
the issuance of the cease and desist order.
§ 13.25.060 HEARING PROCEDURES AND APPEALS.
   (A)   In the event SBMWD denies an application, imposes or materially
modifies a condition of approval that is/are unacceptable to the applicant or
suspends or revokes a permit, an appeal may be commenced by the applicant.
   (B)   All appeals must be filed in the office of the SBMWD General Manager
within 15 days of any denial, approval with conditions, suspension or
revocation. The appeal filed with SBMWD shall include the name of the
applicant; name, address and telephone number of the person representing
applicant; assessor’s parcel number (“APN”) or other description of property
involved; any identifying case number or application number issued by SBMWD;
the basis for the appeal; the date and signature of the applicant.
   (C)   All appeals shall be heard by the SBMWD Board of Water Commissioners
during its regular meetings. The burden of proof at such hearing shall be upon
the applicant. Following the hearing, the Board of Water Commissioners shall
issue its decision. Said decision shall be deemed a final administrative
decision. Upon rendition of any adjudicatory administrative decision by the
SBMWD Board of Water Commissioners, notice shall be given to the parties that
the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by the
provisions of the Cal. Code of Civil Procedure, § 1094.6.
   (D)   Any issue relating to the consent decree or SOW may, at the discretion
of the SBMWD, be adjudicated in the United States District Court for the
Central District of California, including the right of the SBMWD to remove any
action initially brought in a state trial court.
§ 13.25.070 VIOLATIONS, REMEDIES AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any condition of
a permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 per violation, and/or by imprisonment not exceeding six months for each
violation. Each day a violation occurs may be deemed a separate violation.
   (B)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, and in
addition to any other penalties, fines or other action, the SBMWD Board of
Water Commissioners may order the payment of damages and civil penalties not to
exceed $10,000 per day and actual damages for any violation of any provision of
this chapter. Said penalties shall be deemed to be civil penalties and may be
imposed in addition to any criminal penalties.
   (C)   In the event of any violation of any provision of this chapter, and in
addition to any other remedies, at the sole and exclusive discretion of SBMWD,
the permit may be revoked.
   (D)   A violation of any provision of this chapter or any permit provision
or condition shall deemed to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. MC-1221, passed 3-20-2006)
 
APPENDIX A: EXHIBITS
 
Exhibit A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7bb690b80ee5b92444942f82544ba748383751e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5976.png]
Exhibit B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7bb690b80ee5b92444942f82544ba748383751e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5978.png]
Exhibit C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7bb690b80ee5b92444942f82544ba748383751e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5985.png]
 
ORDINANCE MC-1221, 3-20-06
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SAN BERNARDINO, CALIFORNIA, ADDING CHAPTER 13.25 OF
THE SAN BERNARDINO MUNICIPAL CODE ENTITLED SPREADING OR EXTRACTION WITHIN THE
MANAGEMENT ZONE.
EXHIBIT D
 
County Well Recordation Numbers APNs
3601925                         0153351170000
                                0153351171001
                                0150161120000
3600119, 3600742, 3600743       0150154140000
                                0272161120000
                                0272161070000
 
CHAPTER 13.28: COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT WATER, RUBBISH, SEWER OR OTHER
MUNICIPAL UTILITY CHARGES
Section
   
13.28.010   Collection of water, sanitation, sewer or other utility charges
pursuant to state statute
   
13.28.020   Definitions
   
13.28.025   Notice of delinquent utility accounts
   
13.28.030   Description of parcel receiving services to be filed with City
Clerk
   
13.28.040   Notice of filing of reports - hearing
   
13.28.050   Hearing for objections and protests
   
13.28.060   Revision of charges or overrule of objections - notice of pendency
of administrative action
   
13.28.070   Filing of report with County Auditor
   
13.28.080   Charges constitute lien against lot or parcel of land
   
13.28.090   Inclusion of amount of charges on bills for taxes
   
13.28.100   Collection of charges
   
13.28.110   Application of laws to levy, collection and enforcement of general
taxes
   
13.28.120   Issuance of separate bills
§ 13.28.010 COLLECTION OF WATER, SANITATION, SEWER OR OTHER UTILITY CHARGES
PURSUANT TO STATE STATUTE.
   (A)   The city elects to avail itself of the provisions of the Cal. Health
and Safety Code, Division 5, Part 3, Chapter 6, Article 4, §§ 5470 et seq.,
which set forth an alternative method of collecting charges for services and
facilities furnished in connection with sanitation, sewerage or any other
utility, whereby the same are collected by the County Tax Collector.
   (B)   This chapter shall be effective from the date of its adoption for a
period of 50 years, including amendments thereto during that time.
   (C)   With respect to any individual account, and without prior notice
thereof, the city may elect to forego the provisions of this chapter and to
pursue collection of delinquent charges in any other manner permitted by law.
The Integrated Waste Management Division of the Public Works Department shall
develop policies and procedures regarding the collection of delinquent charges.
   (D)   In addition to any remedy contained herein, the city and the City
Municipal Water Department are authorized to discontinue all utility services
and provide notice to the property owners’s 41 days after the payment was due.
(Ord. 3533, passed 10-28-1975; Ord. MC-229, passed 12-21-1982; Ord. MC-1335,
passed 10-4-2010)
§ 13.28.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DELINQUENT CHARGES. Those charges for services, equipment or facilities
which remain unpaid after the date due.
   SANITATION. Refuse services, including, but not limited to, residential,
commercial, recycling or roll-off services, for the removal or recycling of
rubbish, garbage, by-products and like matter.
(Ord. 3533, passed 10-28-1975; Ord. MC-229, passed 12-21-1982; Ord. MC-1335,
passed 10-4-2010)
§ 13.28.025 NOTICE OF DELINQUENT UTILITY ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   Any person or entity who receives water, sanitation, storm drainage or
sewerage services whose account has delinquent charges for services shall be
mailed a notice of the delinquent charges.
   (B)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall notify the assessed
owner shown on the latest equalized tax assessor’s roll whenever delinquent and
unpaid charges for services, which may become a lien on real property in the
manner set forth in the is chapter, remain delinquent and unpaid for 60 days.
The notice so provided shall notify the assessed owner of the delinquent
charges and the lien provided by this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1335, passed 10-4-2010)
§ 13.28.030 DESCRIPTION OF PARCEL RECEIVING SERVICES TO BE FILED WITH CITY
CLERK.
   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall cause to be prepared a
written report which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Said report shall
contain a description of each parcel of real property receiving such water,
sanitation, sewer or other utility services and the amount of the delinquent
charges for each parcel computed in conformity with charges prescribed by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council or pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the board of water Commissioners. The real property may be
described by reference to maps prepared in accordance with Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code, § 327, and on file in the office of the County Assessor or by
reference to plats or maps on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 3533, passed 10-28-1975; Ord. MC-229, passed 12-21-1982; Ord. MC-1335,
passed 10-4-2010)
§ 13.28.040 NOTICE OF FILING OF REPORTS - HEARING.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall cause notice of the filing of said report, and of
a time and place of hearing thereon, to be published pursuant to Cal. Gov’t
Code, § 6066, prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation printed and published within the city.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall cause a notice, in writing, of the filing of the
report proposing to have such charges collected on the tax roll and of the time
and place of hearing thereon, to be mailed to each person to whom any parcel or
parcels of real property described in the report is assessed in the last
equalized assessment roll available on the date the report is prepared, at the
address shown on the assessment roll or as known to the Clerk. If the Mayor and
City Council adopt the report, then the requirements for notice, in writing, to
the persons to whom parcels of real property are assessed shall not apply to
hearings on reports prepared in subsequent fiscal years but notice by
publication as herein provided shall be adequate.
(Ord. 3533, passed 10-28-1975)
§ 13.28.050 HEARING FOR OBJECTIONS AND PROTESTS.
   At the time stated in the notice, the Mayor and City Council shall hear and
consider all objections or protests, if any, to the report referred to in the
notice and may continue the hearing from time to time. If the Mayor and City
Council find that protest is made by the owners of a majority of separate
parcels of property described in the report, then the report shall not be
adopted and the charges shall be collected separately from the tax roll and
shall not constitute a lien against any parcel or parcels of land.
(Ord. 3533, passed 10-28-1975)
§ 13.28.060 REVISION OF CHARGES OR OVERRULE OF OBJECTIONS - NOTICE OF PENDENCY
OF ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION.
   (A)   Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Mayor and City Council may
adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify any charge or overrule any or all
objections and shall make its determination upon each charge as described in
the report, which determination shall be final.
   (B)   The City Administrator may file a notice of pendency of administrative
action with the County Recorder for any parcel or parcels of real property
against which any water, sanitation, sewer or other utility charge is found to
be delinquent hereunder by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 3533, passed 10-28-1975; Ord. MC-229, passed 12-21-1982)
§ 13.28.070 FILING OF REPORT WITH COUNTY AUDITOR.
   On or before August 10 of each year following such final determination, the
Clerk shall file, with the County Auditor, a copy of the report with a
statement endorsed thereon over his or her signature that it has been finally
adopted by the Mayor and City Council, and the County Auditor shall enter the
amounts of the charges against the respective lots or parcels of land as they
appear on the current assessment roll. Where any such parcels are outside the
boundaries of the city, they shall be added to the assessment roll of the city
for the purpose of collecting such charges. If the property is not described on
the roll, the County Auditor may enter the description thereon together with
the amounts of the charges, as shown on the report.
(Ord. 3533, passed 10-28-1975)
§ 13.28.080 CHARGES CONSTITUTE LIEN AGAINST LOT OR PARCEL OF LAND.
   The amount of the charges shall constitute a lien against the lot or parcel
of land against which the charge has been imposed as of 12:00 p.m. the first
Monday in March immediately preceding the date of levy, except as hereinafter
provided.
(Ord. 3533, passed 10-28-1975)
§ 13.28.090 INCLUSION OF AMOUNT OF CHARGES ON BILLS FOR TAXES.
   The County Tax Collector shall include the amount of the charges on bills
for taxes against the respective lot and parcels of land.
(Ord. 3533, passed 10-28-1975)
§ 13.28.100 COLLECTION OF CHARGES.
   Thereafter, the amount of the charges shall be collected at the same time
and in the same manner and by the same persons as, together with and not
separately from, the general taxes of the city, and shall be delinquent at the
same time and thereafter be subject to the same delinquency penalties.
(Ord. 3533, passed 10-28-1975)
§ 13.28.110 APPLICATION OF LAWS TO LEVY, COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT OF GENERAL
TAXES.
   All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of general taxes
of the entity, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to the matters
of delinquency, correction, cancellation, refund and redemptions are applicable
to such charges, except that if any real property to which such charges relate
has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a
lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attached
thereon prior to the date on which the first installment of such taxes would
become delinquent, then the lien which would otherwise be imposed by §
13.28.080 shall not attach to such real property, and the charges relating to
such property shall be transferred to the unsecured roll of collection.
(Ord. 3533, passed 10-28-1975)
§ 13.28.120 ISSUANCE OF SEPARATE BILLS.
   The Tax Collector may, in his or her discretion, issue separate bills for
such charges and separate receipts for collection on account of such charges.
The county shall be compensated for services rendered in connection with the
levy, collection and enforcement of such charges in an amount to be fixed by
agreement between the County Board of Supervisors and the Mayor and City
Council. In any event, the compensation shall not exceed $5 for each account
handled, or 1% of all money collected, whichever is greater. The compensation
shall be paid into the County Salary Fund.
(Ord. 3533, passed 10-28-1975)
CHAPTER 13.32: WASTEWATER FACILITIES
Section
   
13.32.010   Powers and duties of the Water Board
§ 13.32.010 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE WATER BOARD.
   In accordance with the City Charter, §
603, the Water Board shall be responsible for oversight and management of the
city’s wastewater collection and treatment systems, including the regulation of
wastewater facilities. Any rules or regulations promulgated by the Water Board
in connection with its powers under the City Charter, §
603 may be enforced as laws of the city in accordance with
Chapter 2.28.
(Ord. MC-273, passed 5-23-1983; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-571,
passed 12-24-1986; Ord. MC-835, passed 6-3-1992; Ord. MC-853, passed 11-3-1992;
Ord. MC-1010, passed 11-18-1997; Ord. MC-1012, passed 1-13-1998; Ord. MC-1216,
passed 2-22-2006; Ord. MC-1562, passed 9-15-2021)
CHAPTER 13.36: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Section
   
13.36.010   Definitions
   
13.36.020   Public hearing by Council
   
13.36.030   Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution
   
13.36.040   Unlawful acts
   
13.36.050   Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances
   
13.36.060   Other exceptions
   
13.36.070   Notice to property owners and utility companies
   
13.36.080   Responsibility of utility companies
   
13.36.090   Responsibility of property owners
   
13.36.100   Responsibility of city
   
13.36.110   Extension of time
   
13.36.120   Violation - penalty
Cross-reference:
   For provisions on telegraph and telephone poles, see
Chapter 12.12
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on conversion of utilities’ facilities to underground
locations, see Cal. Streets and Highways Code, §§ 5896.1 et seq. and Cal. Gov’t
Code, § 38793
§ 13.36.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSION. The State Public Utilities Commission.
   PERSON. Individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and
employees.
   POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES and ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES. Poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a
district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or
associated service.
   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT or DISTRICTS. The area in the city within which
poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such
area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of §
13.36.030.
   UTILITY. All persons or entities supplying electric, communication or
similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.
(Ord. 2919, passed 7-2-1968)
§ 13.36.020 PUBLIC HEARING BY COUNCIL.
   The Mayor and City Council, hereinafter called Council, may, from time to
time, call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health,
safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated
overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground
installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or
similar or associated service. The City Clerk shall notify all affected
property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities
concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days
prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and
may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested
shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be
final and conclusive.
(Ord. 2919, passed 7-2-1968)
§ 13.36.030 COUNCIL MAY DESIGNATE UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS BY RESOLUTION.
   If, after any such public hearing, the Council finds that the public
necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground
installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution,
declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such
removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a
description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within
which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and
within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground
service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground
installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and
equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such
underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.
(Ord. 2919, passed 7-2-1968)
§ 13.36.040 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders the
removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as
provided in §
13.36.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place,
keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead
facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the
overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant
of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the
underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive
utility service as provided in §
13.36.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after
the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 2919, passed 7-2-1968)
§ 13.36.050 EXCEPTION, EMERGENCY OR UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be
installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without
authority of the Council in order to provide emergency service. The Council may
grant special permission on such terms as the Council may deem appropriate in
cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or
utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead
wires and associated overhead structures.
(Ord. 2919, passed 7-2-1968)
§ 13.36.060 OTHER EXCEPTIONS.
   In any resolution adopted pursuant to §
13.36.030, the city may authorize any or all of the following exceptions:
   (A)   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision
and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer;
   (B)   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
   (C)   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited;
   (D)   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the
transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;
   (E)   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means
of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without
crossing any public street;
   (F)   Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a
utility for furnishing communication services;
   (G)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface
mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and
concealed ducts; and
   (H)   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.
(Ord. 2919, passed 7-2-1968)
§ 13.36.070 NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES.
   (A)   Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted
pursuant to §
13.36.030, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons
owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the
adoption thereof. The City Clerk shall further notify such affected property
owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property
desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated
service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on
their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying
utility or utilities at a new location.
   (B)   Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the
resolution adopted pursuant to §
13.36.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as
such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected
utilities.
(Ord. 2919, passed 7-2-1968)
§ 13.36.080 RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY COMPANIES.
   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a
district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to §
13.36.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits,
conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its
applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission.
(Ord. 2919, passed 7-2-1968)
§ 13.36.090 RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a
building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that
portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities
referred to in §
13.36.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure
being served. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time
provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to §
13.36.030, the City Engineer shall give notice in writing to the owner thereof
as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required
underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice.
   (B)   The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given
either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of
such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a
sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of
such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner
thereof as such owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s
last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll,
and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of San Bernardino. If
notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by
the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof.
If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises,
the City Engineer shall, within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a
copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in
size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
   (C)   The notice given by the City Engineer to provide the required
underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be
done, and shall state that, if the work is not completed within 30 days after
receipt of such notice, the City Engineer will provide such required
underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be
assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon such property.
   (D)   If upon the expiration of the 30-day period, the required underground
facilities have not been provided, the city, by order of the Mayor and upon
issuance of a work order, shall forthwith proceed to cause the work to be done;
provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or
communications services are being furnished thereto, the city shall, in lieu of
providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the
disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated
facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the
work, the City Engineer shall file a written report with the City Council
setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been
provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the
property against which such cost is to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon
fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of
such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days
thereafter.
   (E)   The City Engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such
protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in
possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner
thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to
provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the
Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such
assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed
assessment.
   (F)   Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council
shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there are any, and then
proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.
   (G)   If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation
by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the
property against which the assessment is made by the City Engineer, and the
City Engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a
notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been
paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment
to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the
assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same
time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and
payable, shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per year.
(Ord. 2919, passed 7-2-1968)
§ 13.36.100 RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY.
   (A)   The city shall remove, at its own expense, all city owned equipment
from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the
owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the
resolution enacted pursuant to §
13.36.030.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary,
any fee required to be paid for a wiring permit is waived when the work is to
be provided upon and in the private property of any property owner pursuant to
the wiring permit by such property owner or his or her contractor in an
approved underground utility district.
(Ord. 2919, passed 7-2-1968; Ord. 3217, passed 12-21-1971)
§ 13.36.110 EXTENSION OF TIME.
   In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution
adopted pursuant to §
13.36.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage
of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor
disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control
of the actor, then the period within which such act will be accomplished shall
be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation.
(Ord. 2919, passed 7-2-1968)
§ 13.36.120 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply
with any requirement of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of
this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements is guilty of an
infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. 2919, passed 7-2-1968; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
TITLE 14: FRANCHISES
   Chapter
      
14.04.   GENERAL REGULATIONS
      
14.08.   CABLE, VIDEO AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS
CHAPTER 14.04: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section
   
14.04.010   Franchise required when
   
14.04.020   Application
   
14.04.030   Granting of franchise - conditions
   
14.04.040   Violation - penalty application
   
14.04.050   Operation after franchise expiration - revocable license
§ 14.04.010 FRANCHISE REQUIRED WHEN.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to exercise any privilege
or franchise; to lay or maintain any pipes or conduits in or under any public
street or alley in the city for the transmission of gas, water, heat, steam or
other substance; or to exercise any franchise or privilege for the erection or
maintenance, in or upon any public street or alley in the city, of any
telephone, telegraph, electric light or power poles, wires or system, or for
the erection of any pole or wire for the purpose of transmitting electrical
energy or current, without first having procured a franchise to do so, unless
such person, firm or corporation is entitled to do so by direct and unlimited
authority of the California Constitution or the laws of the U.S. Constitution.
(Ord. 541, passed 11-10-1913)
§ 14.04.020 APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to procure a franchise for any of the purposes mentioned
in §
14.04.010 shall make application therefor in accordance with the procedural
requirements set forth in the Franchise Act of 1937 (Cal. Public Utilities
Code, §§ 6201 et seq.) and as amended.
(Ord. 541, passed 11-10-1913; Ord. 2162, passed 2-19-1957; Ord. MC-1135, passed
12-18-2002)
§ 14.04.030 GRANTING OF FRANCHISE - CONDITIONS.
   The Mayor and City Council may grant a franchise, subject to any
restrictions, terms and conditions (including compensation), without
limitation, that they deem to be in the best interests of the city. The Mayor
and City Council may refuse to grant a franchise, when, in their opinion, the
granting of any such franchise will not be in the best interests of the city.
(Ord. 541, passed 11-10-1913; Ord. MC-1135, passed 12-18-2002)
§ 14.04.040 VIOLATION - PENALTY APPLICATION.
   Any person, firm or corporation exercising or attempting to exercise any
franchise for any of the purposes mentioned in §
14.04.010, or laying or maintaining any pipes or conduits in or upon any street
in the city, for the transmission of gas, water, heat, steam or other
substance, or erecting any telephone, telegraph or electric light or power
poles, wires or system, within the city, in violation of any provision of this
chapter, is guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is
punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010. In addition, any person, firm or corporation exercising or attempting
to exercise any franchise for any of such purposes after a franchise or license
(issued pursuant to this chapter) has expired shall be subject to a civil
penalty of three times the compensation required under the expired franchise or
license prorated on a “per day” basis. Such civil penalty shall be in addition
to any other terms and conditions set out in the franchise or license, and
shall not, in any way, limit or otherwise restrict any other legal or equitable
remedy available to city.
(Ord. 541, passed 11-10-1913; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-1135,
passed 12-18-2002)
§ 14.04.050 OPERATION AFTER FRANCHISE EXPIRATION - REVOCABLE LICENSE.
   If a franchise is to expire within 60 days according to the franchise terms,
and a new franchise has been requested, but has not yet been granted, the
franchisee may request the Mayor and City Council to issue the franchisee a
written revocable license, for a renewable term not to exceed 120 days from the
expiration of the franchise, permitting the franchisee to continue to locate
its existing facilities in or upon public property in the city during the term
of the license. The Mayor and City Council may issue such a revocable license,
subject to any restrictions, terms and conditions (including compensation),
without limitation, that they deem to be in the best interests of the city.
Nothing herein requires the Mayor and City Council to grant such a revocable
license, nor does the issuance of such a revocable license require that the
Mayor and City Council grant the franchisee a new franchise. Upon request of
the franchisee, the City Clerk shall provide a revocable license application
form.
(Ord. MC-1135, passed 12-18-2002)
CHAPTER 14.08: CABLE, VIDEO AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS
Section
Article I. General Provisions
   
14.08.01   Short title
   
14.08.02   Authority
   
14.08.03   Defined terms and phrases
Article II. Procedures for Granting, Renewing and Transferring Franchises for
Cable Systems
   
14.08.04   Franchise required
   
14.08.05   City grants of cable franchises
   
14.08.06   Franchise duration and renewal
   
14.08.07   Limitations of franchise
   
14.08.08   Rights reserved to the city
   
14.08.09   Transfers and assignments
   
14.08.10   Franchise service area; annexations
   
14.08.11   Application for new franchise; contents
   
14.08.12   Franchise approval
   
14.08.13   Franchise renewal
   
14.08.14   Multiple franchises
   
14.08.15   Franchise application processing costs
   
14.08.16   Franchise fee for cable services
   
14.08.17   Contents of cable television franchise agreement
Article III. Open Video Systems
   
14.08.18   Applicability
   
14.08.19   Application required
   
14.08.20   Review of application
   
14.08.21   Agreement required
Article IV. Other Video and Telecommunications Services and Systems
   
14.08.22   Other multi-channel video programming distributors
   
14.08.23   Video providers - registration; customer service standards
   
14.08.24   Telecommunications service provided by telephone corporations
   
14.08.25   Public, educational and governmental support fee (“PEG fee”) and
requirement to provide PEG channels
Article V. Definitions
   
14.08.26   Defined terms and phrases
Article VI. Violations; Enforcement
   
14.08.27   Violations; enforcement
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 14.08.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter is known and may be cited as the “Cable, Video and
Telecommunications Service Providers Ordinance” of the city.
§ 14.08.02 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted by the city pursuant to the Communications Act, the
city’s police powers under its Charter, its authority to control the use of the
public rights-of-way within the city and all other applicable laws.
Cross-reference:
   Communications Act defined, see §
14.08.26
§ 14.08.03 DEFINED TERMS AND PHRASES.
   Various terms and phrases used in this chapter are defined in §
14.08.26.
ARTICLE II. PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING, RENEWING AND TRANSFERRING FRANCHISES FOR
CABLE SYSTEMS
§ 14.08.04 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain or operate a
cable television system within any street or public way in the city without
first obtaining a franchise under the provisions of this article or, if
applicable, under the provisions of the Digital Infrastructure and Video
Competition Act of 2006; provided, however, that any cable operator authorized
to provide cable service under a franchise granted by the city prior to the
effective date of this chapter may continue to exercise that authority until
the expiration or termination of that franchise.
Statutory reference:
   Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006, see Cal. Stats
2006, Assembly Bill No. 2987, Ch. 700 codified at Cal. Public Utilities Code,
§§ 5800 et seq.
§ 14.08.05 CITY GRANTS OF CABLE FRANCHISES.
   Subject to applicable law, the city may, by ordinance or resolution, grant a
franchise to any person, whether or not operating under an existing franchise,
or who elects to provide cable service pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. The franchise shall be subject to all ordinances and regulations of
general application now in effect or subsequently enacted, including, without
limitation, those related to encroachment permits, business licenses, zoning
and building.
§ 14.08.06 FRANCHISE DURATION AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   The term of the franchise or of any franchise renewal shall be
established in the franchise agreement.
   (B)   A franchise may be renewed by the city upon application of the grantee
pursuant to procedures established by the city, subject to applicable federal
and state law. In the event the city does not establish such renewal
procedures, the franchise renewal procedures set forth in federal law shall
apply.
§ 14.08.07 LIMITATIONS OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   A franchise granted under this chapter shall be non-exclusive.
   (B)   The grant of a franchise, right or license to use public rights-of-way
for purposes of providing cable service shall not be construed as a right or
license to use such public rights-of-way for any other purpose.
   (C)   Any right or privilege claimed by a grantee under a franchise in
public rights-of-way or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior
or subsequent lawful occupancy or use thereof, or easement therein, by the city
or other governmental entity.
   (D)   A franchise granted under this chapter shall not relieve a grantee of
any obligation to obtain pole space from any city department, utility company
or others maintaining poles in the public rights-of-way.
§ 14.08.08 RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY.
   (A)   Subject to any restrictions that are mandated by state or federal law,
neither the granting of any franchise nor any provisions of this chapter shall
be construed to preclude the city from granting additional franchises.
   (B)   By its acceptance of a franchise, a grantee agrees to comply with all
lawful ordinances and regulations of general application now in effect or
subsequently enacted; provided, however, that such ordinances and regulations
shall not materially affect grantee’s rights or obligations under the
franchise.
   (C)   Neither the granting of a franchise, nor any provisions of this
chapter, shall constitute a waiver or bar to the city’s lawful exercise of any
governmental right or power.
   (D)   This chapter shall not be construed to impair or affect, in any way,
the right of the city to acquire the grantee’s property through the exercise of
the power of eminent domain, in accordance with applicable law.
   (E)   The Mayor and City Council may do all things necessary in the exercise
of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may determine any question of fact
that may arise during the term of any franchise granted under this chapter.
   (F)   Any right or power in, or duty imposed upon, any officer, employee,
department or board of the city shall be subject to transfer by the city to any
other officer, employee, department or board of the city.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 14.08.09 TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS.
   (A)   Grantee may not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose of,
in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale,
contract, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or
privileges therein granted, without the prior written consent of the Mayor and
City Council. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose
of the franchise without the written consent of the Mayor and City Council is
null and void. The granting of a security interest in any assets of the
grantee, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, will not be deemed a transfer
for the purposes of this section.
   (B)   The requirements of division (A) above apply to any change in control
of the grantee. The word “control,” as used herein, is not limited to the
ownership of major stockholder or partnership interests, but includes actual
working control in whatever manner exercised. If the grantee is a partnership
or a corporation, prior authorization of the city is required where ownership
or control of 25% or more of the partnership interests or of the voting stock
of the corporation, or any company in the tier of companies controlling the
grantee, whether directly or indirectly, is acquired by a person or a group of
persons acting in concert, none of whom, individually or collectively, owns or
controls those partnership interests or that voting stock of the grantee, or
the grantee’s upper tier of controlling companies, as of the effective date of
the franchise.
   (C)   Unless precluded by federal law, the grantee must give prior written
notice to the city of any proposed foreclosure or judicial sale of all or a
substantial part of the grantee’s franchise property. That notification will be
considered by the city as notice that a change in control of ownership of the
franchise will take place, and the provisions of this section that require the
prior written consent of the Mayor and City Council to that change in control
of ownership will apply.
   (D)   For the purpose of determining whether it will consent to an
acquisition, transfer or change in control, the city may inquire about the
qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and the
grantee must assist the city in that inquiry. In seeking the city’s consent to
any change of ownership or control, the grantee or the proposed transferee, or
both, must complete Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or its
equivalent. This application must be submitted to the city not less than 120
days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee must establish that
it possesses the legal, financial and technical capability to remedy all then-
existing defaults and deficiencies, and during the remaining term of the
franchise, to operate and maintain the cable system and to comply with all
franchise requirements. If the legal, financial and technical qualifications of
the proposed transferee are determined to be satisfactory, then the city will
consent to the transfer of the franchise.
   (E)   Any financial institution holding a pledge of the grantee’s assets to
secure the advance of money for the construction or operation of the franchise
property has the right to notify the city that it, or a designee satisfactory
to the city, will take control of and operate the cable television system upon
the grantee’s default in its financial obligations. Further, that financial
institution must also submit a plan for such operation within 90 days after
assuming control. The plan must ensure continued service and compliance with
all franchise requirements during the period that the financial institution
will exercise control over the system. The financial institution may not
exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year, unless
authorized by the city, in its sole discretion, and during that period, it will
have the right to petition the city to transfer the franchise to another
grantee.
   (F)   Unless prohibited by applicable law, the grantee must reimburse the
city for the city’s reasonable review and processing expenses incurred in
connection with any transfer or change in control of the franchise, as provided
for in §
14.08.15.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 14.08.10 FRANCHISE SERVICE AREA; ANNEXATIONS.
   (A)   The franchise service area shall be established in the franchise
agreement.
   (B)   Territory annexed to the city that is not within the service area of a
franchised or licensed cable operator at the time of annexation may be included
within the franchise service area of an incumbent cable operator, as determined
by Mayor and City Council resolution.
   (C)   Territory annexed to the city that is included within the service area
of a franchise or license issued by a local franchising authority other than
the city is subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   If the franchisee or licensee has not commenced construction or
installation of a cable system before the annexation becomes effective, then
all rights acquired by a cable operator under that franchise or license will
terminate by operation of law.
      (2)   If the franchisee or licensee has commenced construction or
installation of a cable system before the annexation becomes effective, then
that franchisee or licensee may continue to provide cable service to the
annexed territory in accordance with the terms and conditions of the existing
franchise or license; provided that all obligations thereunder, including the
timely payment of franchise fees and PEG support fees, if any, shall be due and
owing to the city by operation of law.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 14.08.11 APPLICATION FOR NEW FRANCHISE; CONTENTS.
   (A)   An application for the grant of a new franchise may be submitted by
any person pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and subject to the
terms of the city’s schedule of fees, as such schedule may, from time to time,
be amended. The city may, by advertisement or any other means, solicit
applications for a new franchise by issuing a request for proposals.
   (B)   An application for a new franchise to construct, install, operate or
maintain a cable system in the city shall be filed with the Department of
Finance and Management Services and shall be on forms prescribed by the city.
The city reserves the right to waive all application formalities where the city
determines that the best interests of the city would be served by such waiver.
   (C)   Unless waived in writing by the city, all applications for a franchise
shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   A detailed statement concerning the applicant’s business entity,
including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The names and business addresses of all officers and directors;
         (b)   The names and business addresses of all persons having an
ownership interest of 5% or more in the applicant and the respective ownership
interest of each such person; and
         (c)   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the
applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in
whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant,
and a statement describing the business of any such parent or subsidiary,
including, but not limited to, cable systems owned or controlled by the parent
or subsidiary, and the geographic areas served.
      (3)   A description of the applicant’s previous experience in providing
cable service or similar communications services;
      (4)   A detailed financial statement of the applicant, certified by an
independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year preceding the date
of the application. The city may require a statement from an independent
certified public accountant, or a recognized lending institution, certifying
that the applicant has sufficient financial resources available to construct
and operate the proposed cable system in the city;
      (5)   A detailed pro forma financial plan for the operation of the cable
system during the term of the proposed franchise, in a format prescribed by the
city;
      (6)   A description of any cable system franchises awarded to the
applicant, its parent or subsidiary, including the location and term of these
franchises, the status of their completion, the total cost of completion of
each cable system and the amount of applicant’s and its parent’s or
subsidiary’s resources committed to the completion of these cable systems;
      (7)   A detailed description of the applicant’s proposed plan of
operation which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   A detailed map that describes all areas of the city proposed to
be served, and a proposed schedule for the construction of the cable system and
the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout
the area to be served;
         (b)   A schedule setting forth all proposed classifications of rates
and charges to be paid by subscribers, including installation and other service
charges;
         (c)   A description of the equipment and operational standards
proposed by the applicant;
         (d)   A description of the applicant’s plan to provide public,
educational and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities and
equipment, including a description of the method to be used by the applicant in
reserving and inserting PEG programming; and
         (e)   A description of the applicant’s plans to address the city’s
institutional network needs.
      (8)   A copy of any existing agreement covering the proposed franchise
service area between the applicant and local telephone or electric utilities
that provides for applicant’s use of any facilities of that utility, including,
but not limited to, poles, lines or conduits; and
      (9)   Any additional information that the city deems to be reasonably
necessary to evaluate the applicant’s qualifications.
   (D)   The applicant’s failure to comply with the requirements of this
section may be grounds for rejection of an application at the city’s sole
discretion.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 14.08.12 FRANCHISE APPROVAL.
   (A)   The city may make such investigation as it deems necessary to
determine the ability of an applicant to satisfactorily perform its obligations
under a franchise. The applicant shall timely furnish to the city such
additional information as the city may request.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a complete application, and following the city’s
investigation and review of that application, the City Manager shall prepare a
report and make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council concerning the
application.
   (C)   The Mayor and City Council shall hold a noticed public hearing on the
application. Written notice shall be given to the applicant at least ten days
prior to the hearing by United States mail, postage prepaid, and by publication
once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. Within 60 days
after the close of the hearing, unless an extension of time is mutually agreed
upon by the city and the applicant, the Mayor and City Council shall make a
written decision on whether the franchise should be granted, and if granted,
subject to what conditions.
   (D)   In determining whether to grant an application for a new franchise,
the city may consider all factors that affect the interests of the community,
including, but not limited to, the quality of the proposed cable service; the
areas to be served; the rates to be charged; the amount of franchise fees to be
generated; the experience, character, background, performance history and
financial responsibility of an applicant (and its management and owners); the
technical performance and quality of equipment; the applicant’s willingness and
ability to meet construction requirements; and all other matters deemed
relevant by the city to protect the interests of the city and the public.
   (E)   The decision of the Mayor and City Council concerning the granting or
denial of a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall be final.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 14.08.13 FRANCHISE RENEWAL.
   Franchise renewals shall be processed in accordance with then-applicable law
and with the renewal terms, if any, of the franchise agreement. The city and
the grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time
during the term of the franchise.
§ 14.08.14 MULTIPLE FRANCHISES.
   (A)   In its sole discretion, the city may limit the number of franchises
granted at any one time based upon its consideration of all appropriate
criteria, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The capability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the
facilities of any proposed additional cable systems; and
      (2)   The advantages and disadvantages that may result from additional
cable system competition.
   (B)   The city may require that a grantee be responsible for its own
underground trenching and any associated costs if, in the city’s opinion, the
public rights-of-way in any area cannot reasonably accommodate the additional
cables, machinery, equipment or other facilities contemplated in connection
with the construction, maintenance and operation of a proposed new cable
system.
§ 14.08.15 FRANCHISE APPLICATION PROCESSING COSTS.
   (A)   In connection with any application for a new franchise, a franchise
modification requesting entry into a new area of the city, a franchise renewal
or a franchise transfer, the applicant shall pay an application fee deposit
equal to the city’s estimated costs in processing and reviewing the
application, as such costs may be established, from time to time, by resolution
of the Mayor and City Council. Such costs shall include all estimated
administrative, consultant, noticing and document preparation expenses. No
application shall be considered without payment of the application fee deposit.
If the application fee deposit is less than the city’s actual costs, the
applicant shall pay such additional costs to the city within 30 days after
written notice from the city that such additional payment is required. If
payment of such amount is not made within such time, the city shall cease all
further proceedings related to the application. If actual costs are less than
the application fee deposit, the remaining balance will be refunded to the
applicant.
   (B)   Application fee deposits are exclusive of an applicant’s or grantee’s
obligation to pay other costs and fees required by this chapter or the
franchise agreement, including, without limitation, construction inspection
fees, permit fees and franchise fees.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 14.08.16 FRANCHISE FEE FOR CABLE SERVICES.
   (A)   In consideration for the privilege to use the city’s public rights-of-
way in the operation of its cable system, and because the city will incur costs
and expenses in regulating and administering the franchise, the grantee shall
pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount equal to 5% of the grantee’s gross
revenues, unless a greater amount is authorized by applicable law.
   (B)   The franchise fee shall be paid quarterly and must be received by the
city not later than 45 days after the close of each calendar quarter.
   (C)   Concurrently with the payment of franchise fees, the grantee shall
provide to the city a statement verified by a financial officer of grantee that
sets forth gross revenues for the previous calendar quarter, listing every
revenue source and describing gross revenue computations.
   (D)   (1)   On an annual basis, the grantee shall file a statement certified
by a financial officer that sets forth all gross revenues for the previous
calendar year, listing every revenue source and describing gross revenue
computations.
      (2)   If the city has any objections relating to that report, the city
shall have 30 days to notify the grantee and to request additional information.
The grantee shall have 30 days to provide additional information to resolve any
objections to the city’s satisfaction.
   (E)   (1)   At any time during the term of a franchise, the city has the
right to conduct, or require the grantee to obtain, an independent audit by
certified public accountants approved by the city of all records of the grantee
related to gross revenue reports or computations. The grantee shall pay all
costs of that audit. The grantee shall cooperate with any such audit and shall
make readily available all information requested by the city without regard as
to whether information is contained in documents (as defined in the Public
Records Act) or other media in the possession or under the control of the
grantee.
      (2)   The certified public accountants shall be required to certify in
the audit that the grantee is in compliance with this chapter and the franchise
agreement. The grantee shall maintain, in a readily accessible place, all
relevant financial records for a minimum of four years after any payment period
that such records pertain to.
   (F)   If any franchise fee payment is not made by the due date, interest
shall be charged monthly at a rate of 1%. In addition, if any franchise fee is
not paid in full within 15 days after the grantee’s receipt of notice from the
city concerning the delinquency of that payment, a late fee in the amount of 5%
of the delinquent amount shall be assessed.
Editor’s note:
   Utility usage data is not subject to PRA requests, with certain exceptions
under Cal. Gov’t Code, § 7927.410 (formerly Cal. Gov’t Code, § 6254.4).
Statutory reference:
   Public Records Act, see Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 7920.000 et seq.
§ 14.08.17 CONTENTS OF CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   The provisions of a franchise agreement for the operation of a cable
television system may relate to or include, without limitation, the following
subject matters:
      (1)   The geographical area, duration and non-exclusive nature of the
franchise;
      (2)   The applicable franchise fee to be paid to the city, including the
percentage amount, the method of computation and the time for payment;
      (3)   Requirements relating to compliance with and implementation of
state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to the operation of the cable
television system;
      (4)   Requirements relating to the construction, upgrade or rebuild of
the cable television system, as well as the provision of special services, such
as outlets for public buildings, emergency alert capability and parental
control devices;
      (5)   Requirements relating to the maintenance of a performance bond, a
security fund, a letter of credit or similar assurances as determined by the
city to secure the performance of the grantee’s obligations under the franchise
agreement;
      (6)   Requirements relating to liability insurance, workers’ compensation
insurance and indemnification;
      (7)   Requirements relating to consumer protection and customer service
standards, including the resolution of subscriber complaints and disputes and
the protection of subscribers’ privacy rights, which requirements may include,
without limitation, compliance with the statutes, rules and regulations set
forth below in §
14.08.23;
      (8)   Requirements relating to the grantee’s support of local cable
usage, including the provision of public, educational or governmental access
channels; the coverage of public meetings and special events; interconnection
requirements; and financial support for the required access channel facilities
and activities that is consistent with this title;
      (9)   Requirements relating to construction, operation and maintenance of
the cable system within the public rights-of-way, including compliance with all
applicable building codes and permit requirements; the abandonment, removal or
relocation of facilities; and compliance with FCC technical standards;
      (10)   Requirements relating to record-keeping, accounting procedures,
reporting, periodic audits, performance reviews and the inspection of grantee’s
books and records;
      (11)   Acts or omissions constituting material breaches of or defaults
under the franchise agreement, and the applicable penalties or remedies for
those breaches or defaults, including fines, penalties, liquidated damages,
suspension, revocation and termination;
      (12)   Requirements relating to the sale, assignment or other transfer or
change in control of the franchise;
      (13)   The grantee’s obligation to maintain continuity of service and to
authorize, under certain specified circumstances, the city’s operation and
management of the cable system; and
      (14)   Such additional requirements, conditions, policies and procedures
as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the franchise agreement and
that will, in the judgment of the city, best serve the public interest and
protect the public health, welfare and safety.
   (B)   If there is any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of a
franchise agreement authorized by the Mayor and City Council and provisions of
this section, the provisions of the franchise agreement will control.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
ARTICLE III. OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS
§ 14.08.18 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this article apply to an open video system operator that
intends to deliver video programming to consumers in the city over an open
video system.
§ 14.08.19 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before commencing the delivery of video programming services to
consumers in the city over an open video system, the open video system operator
must file an application with the city. That application must include or be
accompanied by the following, as applicable:
      (1)   The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the
applicant;
      (2)   Copies of FCC Form 1275, all “notices of intent” filed under 47
C.F.R. § 76.1503(b)(1) and the order of the FCC, all of which relate to
certification of the applicant to operate an open video system in accordance
with § 653(a)(1) of the Communications Act, being 47 U.S.C. § 573(a)(1), and
the FCC’s rules;
      (3)   The area or areas of the city that the applicant desires to serve;
      (4)   A description of the open video system services that will be
offered by the applicant over its existing or proposed facilities;
      (5)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
applicant to deliver the open video system services;
      (6)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the ownership and
operation of the open video system described in the application;
      (7)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant’s financial ability to:
         (a)   Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new physical plant
that is proposed to be constructed in the city;
         (b)   Comply with the city’s PEG access channel requirements as
specified below in §
14.08.21(B)(4); and
         (c)   Comply with the city’s requirement that gross revenue fees be
paid in the sum of 5%, as specified below in §
14.08.21(B)(2).
      (8)   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use, to
purchase or to lease;
      (9)   If the applicant’s operation of the open video system will require
the construction of a new physical plant in the city, the following additional
information must be provided:
         (a)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates;
         (b)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map
of any new facilities to be constructed in the city, in sufficient detail to
identify:
            1.   The location and route requested for the applicant’s proposed
facilities;
            2.   The locations, if any, for interconnection with the facilities
of other telecommunications service providers; and
            3.   The specific structures, improvements, facilities relocate on
a temporary or permanent basis.
         (c)   The applicant’s statement that, in constructing any new physical
plant, the applicant will comply with all applicable ordinances, rules and
regulations of the city, including the payment of all required permit and
processing fees.
      (10)   The information and documentation that is required to be submitted
to the city by a video provider, as specified below in §
14.08.23(B);
      (11)   Such additional information as may be required by the City
Manager; and
      (12)   A non-refundable filing fee in an amount established by resolution
of the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   If any item of information specified in division (A) above is
determined under paramount federal or state law to be unlawful, the City
Manager is authorized to waive the requirement that such information be
included in the application.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 14.08.20 REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
   Within 30 days after receipt of an application filed under §
14.08.19 that is deemed to be complete, the City Manager will give written
notice to the applicant of the city’s intent to negotiate an agreement setting
forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open
video system will be authorized by the city. The commencement of those
negotiations will be on a date that is mutually acceptable to the city and to
the applicant.
§ 14.08.21 AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No video programming services may be provided in the city by an open
video system operator unless the operator and the city have executed a written
agreement, which may be designated as a franchise, setting forth the terms and
conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video system will be
authorized by the city.
   (B)   The agreement between the city and the open video system operator may
contain terms and conditions that relate to the following subject matters, to
the extent that such terms, conditions and subject matters are not preempted by
federal statute or regulations:
      (1)   The nature, scope and duration of the agreement, including
provisions for its renewal or extension;
      (2)   The obligation of the open video system operator to pay to the
city, at specified times, fees on the gross revenue received by the operator,
as authorized by 47 C.F.R. § 76.1511, in accordance with the following
standards and procedures.
         (a)   The amount of the fees on the gross revenue will be 5%, and will
be paid in lieu of the franchise fees authorized under § 622 of the
Communications Act, being 47 U.S.C. § 542.
         (b)   The term GROSS REVENUE means:
             1.   All gross revenue received by an open video system operator
or its affiliates, including all revenues received from subscribers and all
carriage revenues received from unaffiliated video programming providers; and
            2.   All advertising revenues received by the operator or its
affiliates in connection with the provision of video programming, where such
revenues are included in the calculation of the cable franchise fee paid to the
city by the franchised cable operator. The term GROSS REVENUE does not include
revenue, such as subscriber or advertising revenue, collected by unaffiliated
video programming providers.
      (3)   The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with
requirements relating to information collection and record-keeping, accounting
procedures, reporting, periodic audits and inspection of records in order to
ensure the accuracy of the fees on the OVS gross revenue that are required to
be paid as specified above in division (B)(2) above;
      (4)   The obligation of the open video system operator to meet the city’s
requirements with respect to PEG access facilities, as provided for in 47
C.F.R. § 76.1505. In this regard, the following standards and procedures are
applicable.
         (a)   The open video system operator is subject to the same PEG access
channel requirements that apply within the cable television franchise service
area with which its system overlaps.
         (b)   The open video system operator must ensure that all subscribers
receive all PEG access channels within the franchise service area in which the
city’s subscribers are located.
         (c)   The open video system operator may negotiate with the city to
establish the operator’s obligations with respect to PEG access facilities.
These negotiations may include the city’s franchised cable operator if the
city, the open video system operator and the franchised cable operator so
desire.
         (d)   If the open video system operator and the city are unable to
reach an agreement regarding the operator’s obligations with respect to public,
educational and government access channel capacity, services, facilities and
equipment within the city’s jurisdiction, then the following obligations will
be imposed.
            1.   The open video system operator must satisfy the same PEG
access channel obligations as the city’s franchised cable operator by providing
the same amount of channel capacity for PEG access and by matching the city’s
franchised cable operator’s annual financial contributions in support of
public, educational and government access services, facilities and equipment
that are actually used by the city. For in-kind contributions, such as cameras
or production studios, the open video system operator may satisfy its statutory
obligation by negotiating mutually agreeable terms with the city’s franchised
cable operator, so that PEG access services to the city are improved or
increased. If such terms cannot be agreed upon, the open video system operator
must pay to the city the monetary equivalent of the franchised cable operator’s
depreciated in-kind contribution, or, in the case of facilities, the annual
amortization value. Any matching contributions provided by the open video
system operator must be used to fund activities arising under § 611 of the
Communications Act, being 47 U.S.C. § 531.
            2.   The city will impose upon the open video system operator the
same rules and procedures that it imposes upon the franchised cable operator
with regard to the open video system operator’s use of channel capacity
designated for PEG access channel use when that capacity is not being used for
such purposes.
         (e)   The city’s franchised cable operator is required under federal
law to permit the open video system operator to connect with its PEG access
channel feeds. The open video system operator and the franchised cable operator
may decide how to accomplish this connection, taking into consideration the
physical and technical characteristics of the cable and the open video systems
involved. If the franchised cable operator and the open video system operator
cannot agree on how to accomplish the connection, the city has the right to
decide. The city may require that the connection occur on city owned property
or on public rights-of-way.
         (f)   All costs of connection to the franchised cable operator’s PEG
access channel feed must be borne by the open video system operator. These
costs will be counted towards the open video system operator’s matching
financial contributions set forth above in division (B)(4)(d)1. above.
         (g)   The city will not impose upon the open video system operator any
public, educational or government access channel obligations that are more
favorable or less burdensome than those imposed upon the franchised cable
operator.
         (h)   If there is no existing franchised cable operator, the
provisions of 47 C.F.R. § 76.1505(d)(6) will be applicable in determining the
obligations of the open video system operator.
         (i)   The open video system operator must adjust its system to comply
with new public, educational, governmental and access channel obligations
imposed on the city’s franchised cable operator following a renewal of the
cable television franchise; provided, however, that the open video system
operator will not be required to displace other programmers using its open
video system to accommodate PEG access channels. The open video system operator
must comply with such new PEG access channel obligations whenever additional
capacity is or becomes available, whether it is due to increased channel
capacity or to decreased demand for channel capacity.
      (5)   If the city and the open video system operator cannot agree on the
application of the FCC’s rules regarding the open video system operator’s
obligations to provide PEG access under the provisions of division (B)(4)
above, then either party may file a complaint with the FCC in accordance with
the dispute resolution procedures set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.1514. No
agreement will be executed by the city until the dispute has been finally
resolved;
      (6)   If the open video system operator intends to maintain an
institutional network, as defined in § 611(f) of the Communications Act, being
47 U.S.C. § 531(f), the city will require that educational and government
access channels be designated on that institutional network to the same extent
that those channels are designated on the institutional network of the city’s
franchised cable operator. In addition, to the extent authorized by federal
law, the open video system operator may be required by the city to satisfy the
same financial obligations and other requirements that are imposed upon the
franchised cable operator to support data-transmission and related services
that are provided by the institutional network;
      (7)   The authority of an open video system provider to exercise
editorial control over any public, educational or government use of channel
capacity will be restricted in accordance with the provisions of 47 C.F.R. §
76.1505(f);
      (8)   The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with all
applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances and regulations,
relating to customer service standards, including the Cable Television and
Video Provider Customer Service and Information Act (Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 53054
et seq.); the Video Customer Service Act (Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 53088 et seq.);
and the consumer protection and service standards of this chapter, commencing
with §
14.08.22;
      (9)   If new physical plant is proposed to be constructed within the
city, the obligation of the open video system operator to comply with the
following rights-of-way use and management responsibilities that are also
imposed by the city upon other telecommunications service providers in a non-
discriminatory and competitively neutral manner:
         (a)   Compliance with all applicable city laws, including applications
for excavation, encroachment and construction permits and the payment of all
required permit and inspection fees;
         (b)   The coordination of construction activities;
         (c)   Compliance with established standards and procedures for
constructing lines across private property;
         (d)   Compliance with all applicable insurance and indemnification
requirements;
         (e)   The repair and resurfacing of construction-damaged streets; and
         (f)   Compliance with all public safety requirements that are
applicable to telecommunications service providers using public property or
public rights-of-way.
      (10)   Acts or omissions constituting breaches or defaults of the
agreement, and the applicable penalties, liquidated damages and other remedies,
including fines or the suspension, revocation or termination of the agreement;
      (11)   Requirements relating to the sale, assignment or transfer of the
open video system;
      (12)   Requirements relating to the open video system operator’s
compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws, rules and
regulations pertaining to the operation of the open video system; and
      (13)   Such additional requirements, conditions, terms, policies and
procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the city and the open video system
operator and that will, in the judgment of the Mayor and City Council, best
serve the public interest and protect the public health, welfare and safety.
ARTICLE IV. OTHER VIDEO AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES AND SYSTEMS
§ 14.08.22 OTHER MULTI-CHANNEL VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTORS.
   The term CABLE SYSTEM does not include a facility that serves subscribers
without using any public rights-of-way. Consequently, the categories of multi-
channel video programming distributors identified below are not deemed to be
CABLE SYSTEMS and are, therefore, exempt from the city’s franchise requirements
and from certain other local regulatory provisions authorized by federal law;
provided that their distribution or transmission facilities do not involve the
use of the city’s public rights-of-way.
   (A)   MULTI-CHANNEL MULTI-POINT DISTRIBUTION SERVICE (“MMDS”), also known as
WIRELESS CABLE, which typically involves the transmission by an FCC-licensed
operator of numerous broadcast stations from a central location using line-of-
sight technology.
   (B)   LOCAL MULTI-POINT DISTRIBUTION SERVICE (“LMDS”), another form of over-
the-air, wireless video service for which licenses are auctioned by the FCC and
that offers video programming, telephone and data networking services.
   (C)   DIRECT BROADCAST SATELLITE (“DBS”), also referred to as DIRECT-TO-HOME
SATELLITE SERVICES, which involves the distribution or broadcasting of
programming or services by satellite directly to the subscriber’s premises
without the use of ground receiving or distribution equipment, except at the
subscriber’s premises or in the up-link process to the satellite. Local
regulation of direct-to-home satellite services is further proscribed by the
following federal statutory provisions.
      (1)   47 U.S.C. § 303(v) confers upon the FCC exclusive jurisdiction to
regulate the provisions of direct-to-home satellite services.
      (2)   Section 602 of the Communications Act, being 47 U.S.C. § 522,
states that a provider of direct-to-home satellite service is exempt from the
collection or remittance, or both, of any tax or fee imposed by any local
taxing jurisdiction on direct-to-home satellite service. The terms TAX and FEE
are defined by federal statute to mean any local sales tax, local use tax,
local intangible tax, local income tax, business license tax, utility tax,
privilege tax, gross receipts tax, excise tax, franchise fees, local
telecommunications tax or any other tax, license or fee that is imposed for the
privilege of doing business, regulating or raising revenue for a local taxing
jurisdiction.
§ 14.08.23 VIDEO PROVIDERS - REGISTRATION; CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Unless the customer protection and customer service obligations of a
video provider are specified in a franchise with the city, a video provider
must comply with all applicable provisions of the following state statutes:
      (1)   The Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and
Information Act (Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 53054 et seq.); and
      (2)   The Video Customer Service Act (Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 53088 et seq.).
   (B)   (1)   All video providers that are operating in the city on the
effective date of this chapter, or that intend to operate in the city after the
effective date of this chapter, and are not required under applicable law to
operate under a franchise, license, lease or similar written agreement with the
city, must register with the city.
      (2)   The registration form must include or be accompanied by the
following:
         (a)   The video provider’s name, address and local telephone numbers;
         (b)   The names of the officers of the video provider;
         (c)   A copy of the video provider’s written policies and procedures
relating to customer service standards and the handling of customer complaints,
as required by Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 53054 et seq. These customer service
standards must include, without limitation, standards regarding the following:
            1.   Installation, disconnection, service and repair obligations,
employee identification and service call response time and scheduling;
            2.   Customer telephone and office hours;
            3.   Procedures for billing, charges, refunds and credits;
            4.   Procedures for termination of service;
            5.   Notice of the deletion of a programming service, the changing
of channel assignments or an increase in rates;
            6.   Complaint procedures and procedures for bill dispute
resolution;
            7.   The video provider’s written acknowledgment of its obligation
under Cal. Gov’t Code, § 53055.1 to provide to new customers a notice
describing the customer service standards specified in divisions (B)(2)(c)1.
through (B)(2)(c)6. above at the time of installation or when service is
initiated. The notice must also include, in addition to all of the information
described above in divisions (B)(2)(c)1. through (B)(2)(c)6. above, all of the
following:
               a.   A listing of the services offered by the video provider
that clearly describes all levels of service and the rates for each level of
service;
               b.   The telephone number or numbers through which customers may
subscribe to, change or terminate service; request customer service; or seek
general or billing information; and
               c.   A description of the rights and remedies that the video
provider may make available to its customers if the video provider does not
materially meet its customer service standards.
            8.   The video provider’s written commitment to distribute annually
to its employees and customers, and to the city, a notice describing the
customer service standards specified above in divisions (B)(2)(c)1. through (B)
(2)(c)6. above. This annual notice must include the report of the video
provider on its performance in meeting its customer service standards, as
required by Cal. Gov’t Code, § 53055.2.
         (d)   Unless a video provider is exempt under federal law from its
payment, a registration fee in an amount established by resolution of the Mayor
and City Council to cover the reasonable costs incurred by the city in
reviewing and processing the registration form; and
         (e)   In addition to the registration fee specified above in division
(B)(2)(d) above, the written commitment of the video provider to pay to the
city, when due, all costs and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in
resolving any disputes between the video provider and its subscribers, which
dispute resolution is mandated by Cal. Gov’t Code, § 53088.2(p).
   (C)   The customer service obligations imposed upon video providers by the
Video Customer Service Act, Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 53088 et seq. consist of the
following.
      (1)   Every video provider must render reasonably efficient service, make
repairs promptly and interrupt service only as necessary.
      (2)   All video provider personnel contacting subscribers or potential
subscribers outside the office of the provider must be clearly identified as
associated with the video provider.
      (3)   At the time of installation, and annually thereafter, all video
providers must provide to all customers a written notice of the programming
offered, the prices for that programming, the provider’s installation and
customer service policies and the name, address and telephone number of the
city’s office that is designated for receiving complaints.
      (4)   All video providers must have knowledgeable, qualified company
representatives available to respond to customer telephone inquiries Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays, during normal business hours.
      (5)   All video providers must provide to customers a toll-free or local
telephone number for installation, service and complaint calls. These calls
must be answered promptly by the video providers.
      (6)   All video providers must render bills that are accurate and
understandable.
      (7)   All video providers must respond promptly to a complete outage in a
customer’s service. The response must occur within 24 hours of the reporting of
such outage to the provider, except in those situations beyond the reasonable
control of the video provider. A video provider will be deemed to respond to a
complete outage when a company representative arrives at the outage location
within 24 hours and begins to resolve the problem.
      (8)   All video providers must provide a minimum of 30 days’ written
notice before increasing rates or deleting channels. All video providers must
make every reasonable effort to submit the notice to the city in advance of the
distribution to customers. The 30-day notice is waived if the increases in
rates or deletion of channels are outside the control of the video provider. In
those cases, the video provider must make reasonable efforts to provide
customers with as much notice as possible.
      (9)   Every video provider must allow every residential customer who pays
his or her bill directly to the video provider at least 15 days from the date
the bill for services is mailed to the customer, to pay the listed charges
unless otherwise agreed to pursuant to a residential rental agreement
establishing tenancy. Customer payments must be posted promptly. No video
provider may terminate residential service for non-payment of a delinquent
account unless the video provider furnishes notice of the delinquency and
impending termination at least 15 days prior to the proposed termination. The
notice must be mailed, postage prepaid, to the customer to whom the service is
billed. Notice must not be mailed until the sixteenth day after the date the
bill for services was mailed to the customer. The notice of delinquency and
impending termination may be part of a billing statement. Additionally, no
video provider may assess a late fee any earlier than the twenty-second day
after the bill for service has been mailed.
      (10)   Every notice of termination of service, pursuant to the preceding
division (C)(9) above, must include all of the following information:
         (a)   The name and address of the customer whose account is
delinquent;
         (b)   The amount of the delinquency;
         (c)   The date by which payment is required in order to avoid
termination of service; and
         (d)   The telephone number of a representative of the video provider
who can provide additional information and handle complaints or initiate an
investigation concerning the service and charges in question.
      (11)   Service may only be terminated on days in which the customer can
reach a representative of the video provider either in person or by telephone.
      (12)   Any service terminated without good cause must be restored without
charge for the service restoration. Good cause includes, but is not limited to,
failure to pay, payment by check for which there are insufficient funds, theft
of service, abuse of equipment or system personnel or other similar subscriber
actions.
      (13)   All video providers must issue requested refund checks promptly,
but no later than 45 days following the resolution of any dispute, and
following the return of the equipment supplied by the video provider, if
service is terminated.
      (14)   All video providers must issue security or customer deposit refund
checks promptly, but no later than 45 days following the termination of
service, less any deductions permitted by law.
      (15)   Video providers must not disclose the name and address of a
subscriber for commercial gain to be used in mailing lists or for other
commercial purposes not reasonably related to the conduct of the businesses of
the video providers or their affiliates, unless the video providers have
provided to the subscriber a notice, separate or included in any other customer
notice, that clearly and conspicuously describes the subscriber’s ability to
prohibit the disclosure. Video providers must provide an address and telephone
number for a local subscriber to use without toll charge to prevent disclosure
of the subscriber’s name and address.
   (D)   As authorized by Cal. Gov’t Code, § 53088.2(r), the following schedule
of penalties is adopted. These penalties may be imposed for the material breach
by a video provider of the consumer protection and service standards that are
set forth in division (C) above; provided that the breach is within the
reasonable control of the video provider. These penalties are in addition to
any other remedies authorized by this chapter or by any other law, and the city
has discretion to elect the remedy that it will apply. The imposition of
penalties authorized by this division (D) will not prevent the city or any
other affected party from exercising any other remedy to the extent permitted
by law, including, but not limited to, any judicial remedy as provided in
division (D)(2) below.
      (1)   Schedule of penalties.
         (a)   For a first material breach: the maximum penalty is $200 for
each day of material breach, but not to exceed a cumulative total of $600 for
each occurrence of material breach, irrespective of the number of customers
affected;
         (b)   For a second material breach of the same nature for which a
monetary penalty was previously assessed within the preceding 12-month period:
the maximum penalty is $400 per day, not to exceed a cumulative total of $1,200
for each occurrence of the material breach, irrespective of the number of
customers affected;
         (c)   For a third or further material breach of the same nature for
which a monetary penalty was previously assessed within the preceding 12-month
period: the maximum penalty is $1,000 per day, not to exceed a cumulative total
of $3,000 for each occurrence of the material breach, irrespective of the
number of customers affected; and
         (d)   The maximum penalties referenced above may be increased by any
additional amount authorized by state law.
      (2)   Judicial remedies not affected. The imposition of penalties in
accordance with the provisions of division (D)(1) above do not preclude any
affected party from pursuing any judicial remedy that is available to that
party.
      (3)   Administration, notice and appeal.
         (a)   The City Manager is authorized to administer this division (D).
Decisions by the City Manager to assess penalties against a video provider must
be in writing and must contain findings supporting the decisions. Decisions by
the City Manager are final, unless appealed to the Mayor and City Council.
         (b)   If the video provider or any interested person is aggrieved by a
decision of the City Manager, the aggrieved party may, within ten days of the
written decision, appeal that decision in writing to the Mayor and City
Council. The appeal letter must be addressed to the City Clerk and must be
accompanied by any applicable fee established by the Mayor and City Council for
processing the appeal. The Mayor and City Council may affirm, modify or reverse
the decision of the City Manager.
         (c)   The imposition of monetary penalties under division (D)(1) above
is subject to the following requirements and limitations.
            1.   The city must give the video provider written notice of any
alleged material breach of the consumer service standards and must allow the
video provider at least 30 days from receipt of that notice to remedy the
breach.
            2.   For the purpose of assessing monetary penalties, a material
breach will be deemed to have occurred for each day following the expiration of
the period for cure specified in division (D)(3)(c)1. above that the material
breach has not been remedied by the video provider, irrespective of the number
of customers affected.
            3.   In assessing monetary penalties under this division (D), the
City Manager, any designated hearing officer or the Mayor and City Council, as
applicable, may take into account the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity
of the violation and, with respect to the video provider, the degree of
culpability, any history of prior violations and such other matters as may be
relevant. If warranted under the circumstances, the monetary penalty to be
assessed may be less than the maximum penalty authorized in division (D)(1)
above.
(Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 14.08.24 TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDED BY TELEPHONE CORPORATIONS.
   Any video programming provided by a telephone corporation that uses public
rights-of-way in the delivery of that video programming, regardless of the
technology used, will be considered a cable service under this chapter unless
such programming is otherwise expressly authorized by state or federal law.
   (A)   In recognition of and in compliance with statutory requirements that
are set forth in state law, the following regulatory provisions are applicable
to a telephone corporation that desires to provide telecommunications service
by means of facilities that are proposed to be constructed within the city’s
public rights-of-way.
      (1)   The telephone corporation must apply for and obtain, as may be
applicable, an excavation permit, an encroachment permit or a building permit
(“ministerial permit”).
      (2)   In addition to the information required by this chapter, in
connection with an application for a ministerial permit, a telephone
corporation must submit to the city the following supplemental information:
         (a)   A copy of the certificate of public convenience and necessity
issued by the State Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”) to the applicant, and
a copy of the CPUC decision that authorizes the applicant to provide the
telecommunications service for which the facilities are proposed to be
constructed in the city’s public rights-of-way; and
         (b)   If the applicant has obtained from the CPUC a certificate of
public convenience to operate as a “competitive local carrier,” the following
additional requirements are applicable.
            1.   As required by the CPUC, the applicant must establish that it
has filed with the city, in a timely manner, a quarterly report that describes
the type of construction and the location of each construction project proposed
to be undertaken in the city during the calendar quarter in which the
application is filed, which information is sufficient to enable the city to
coordinate multiple projects, as may be necessary.
            2.   If the applicant’s proposed construction project will extend
beyond the utility rights-of-way into undisturbed areas or other rights-of-way,
the applicant must establish that it has filed a petition with the CPUC to
amend its certificate of public convenience and necessity and that the proposed
construction project has been subjected to a full-scale environmental analysis
by the CPUC, as required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC.
            3.   The applicant must inform the city whether its proposed
construction project will be subject to any of the mitigation measures
specified in the negative declaration (“Competitive Local Carriers (“CLCs”)
Projects for Local Exchange Communication Service throughout California”) or to
the mitigation monitoring plan adopted in connection with Decision No. 95-12-
057 of the CPUC. The city’s issuance of a ministerial permit will be
conditioned upon the applicant’s compliance with all applicable mitigation
measures and monitoring requirements imposed by the CPUC upon telephone
corporations that are designated as “competitive local carriers.”
   (B)   In recognition of the fact that numerous excavations in the public
rights-of-way diminish the useful life of the surface pavement, and for the
purpose of mitigating the adverse impacts of numerous excavations on the
quality and longevity of public street maintenance within the city, the
following policies and procedures are adopted.
      (1)   The City Manager is directed to ensure that all public utilities,
including telephone corporations, comply with all local design, construction,
maintenance and safety standards that are contained within, or are related to,
a ministerial permit that authorizes the construction of facilities within the
public rights-of-way.
      (2)   The City Manager is directed to coordinate the construction and
installation of facilities by public utilities, including telephone
corporations, in order to minimize the number of excavations in the public
rights-of-way. In this regard, based upon projected plans for street
construction or renovation projects, the City Manager is authorized to
establish, on a quarterly basis, one or more construction time periods or
“windows” for the installation of facilities within the public rights-of-way.
Telephone corporations and other public utilities that submit applications for
ministerial permits to construct facilities after a predetermined date may be
required to delay such construction until the next quarterly “window” that is
established by the city.
   (C)   Subject to applicable provisions of state and federal law, any video
programming provided by a telephone corporation that uses public rights-of-way
in the transmission or delivery of that video programming, regardless of the
technology used, will be deemed to be a video service subject to the franchise
requirements set forth in §
14.08.04.
   (D)   Telephone corporations that apply for and receive a state franchise to
provide video service within all or any part of the city must comply with the
provisions of this title, and all applicable provisions of the Digital
Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (Division 2.5 of the Cal.
Public Utilities Code, commencing with § 5800).
§ 14.08.25 PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL SUPPORT FEE (“PEG FEE”) AND
REQUIREMENT TO PROVIDE PEG CHANNELS.
   (A)   PEG fee. A fee of 1% of gross revenues shall be assessed on all video
service providers that use the public rights-of-way, including all local
franchisees and all holders of state franchises as consistent with state or
federal law. The PEG fee shall be paid quarterly, to be received by the city
not later than 45 days after the close of each quarter of grantee’s fiscal
year.
      (1)   On a quarterly basis, the grantee shall provide the city a complete
and accurate statement verified by a financial officer of the grantee
indicating gross revenues for the past quarter, listing every revenue source
and depicting gross revenue computations.
      (2)   A video service provider subject to this section may recover the
amount of any fee by billing a recovery fee as a separate line item on the
regular bill of each subscriber.
   (B)   Channel designation. All video service providers that use the public
rights-of-way shall designate sufficient amount of capacity on its network to
allow the carriage of at least three public, educational or governmental access
(“PEG”) channels. For the purposes of this section, a PEG channel is deemed
activated if it is being utilized for PEG programming within the city for at
least eight hours per day.
      (1)   PEG channels shall be for the exclusive use of the city or its
designee to provide public, educational or governmental channels.
      (2)   Advertising, underwriting or sponsorship recognition may be carried
on the channels for the purpose of funding PEG-related activities.
      (3)   The PEG channels shall all be carried on the basic service tier of
the grantee.
      (4)   To the extent feasible, the PEG channels shall not be separated
numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier and the
channel numbers for the PEG channels shall be the same channel numbers used by
the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by federal law.
      (5)   After the initial designation of PEG channel numbers, the channel
numbers shall not be changed without the agreement of the city unless the
change is required by federal law.
      (6)   Each channel shall be capable of carrying a National Television
System Committee (“NTSC”) television signal.
   (C)   Interconnection. Where technically feasible, all grantee’s video
service providers shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks
for the purpose of providing PEG programming. Interconnection may be
accomplished by direct cable, microwave link, satellite or other reasonable
method of connection. Holders of a state franchise and incumbent cable
operators shall provide interconnection of the PEG channels on reasonable terms
and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If a holder of a state
franchise and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable
interconnection agreement, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to
allow the holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent’s network at a
technically feasible point on the holder’s network as identified by the holder.
If no technically feasible point for interconnection is available, the holder
of a state franchise shall make an interconnection available to the channel
originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection.
The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the holder of a state
franchise requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the
parties.
ARTICLE V. DEFINITIONS
§ 14.08.26 DEFINED TERMS AND PHRASES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense and words in the singular include the plural number.
      AFFILIATE. When used in relation to any person, another person who owns
or controls, is owned or controlled by or is under common ownership or control
with, such person.
      CABLE SERVICE. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming, or other programming services, and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of that video programming or other
programming service. For the purposes of this definition, VIDEO PROGRAMMING
means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to
programming provided by, a television broadcast station; and OTHER PROGRAMMING
SERVICE means information that a cable system operator makes available to all
subscribers generally.
      CABLE SYSTEM, CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM or CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM. A
facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated
signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide
cable service that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple
subscribers within a community. The term CABLE SYSTEM does not include:
         (a)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals
of one or more television broadcast stations;
         (b)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public
rights-of-way;
         (c)   A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act, being 47 U.S.C.
pt. I, commencing with §§ 201 et seq., except that such facility will be
considered a cable system (other than for purposes specified in § 621(c) of the
Communications Act, being 47 U.S.C. § 541(c)), to the extent such facility is
used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless
the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services;
         (d)   An open video system that complies with § 653 of the
Communications Act, being 47 U.S.C. § 573; or
         (e)   Any facilities of an electric utility that are used solely for
operating its electric utility system.
      CABLE SYSTEM OPERATOR or CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons:
         (a)   Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or
through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable
system; or
         (b)   Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of that cable system.
      C.F.R. The Code of Federal Regulations. Thus, the citation of “47 C.F.R.
§ 80.1” refers to title 47, part 80, section 1 of the Code of Federal
Regulations.
      CITY. The City of San Bernardino, California as represented by its Mayor
and City Council or by any delegate acting within the scope of its delegated
authority.
      CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of San Bernardino, or the City
Manager’s designee.
      COMMUNICATIONS ACT. The Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. §§ 153 et
seq.), as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, being Pub.
Law No. 98-549, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of
1992, being Pub. Law. No. 102-385, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996,
being Pub. Law No. 104-104, amending various sections of U.S.C. Titles 15, 18
and 47.
      FCC or FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION. The federal administrative
agency, or any lawful successor, that is authorized to regulate cable and
telecommunications services and cable and telecommunications service providers
on a national level.
      FRANCHISE. An initial authorization, or the renewal of an initial
authorization, granted by the Mayor and City Council, whether such
authorization is designated as a franchise, agreement, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate or otherwise, that authorizes the
construction or operation of a cable system or an open video system.
      FRANCHISE FEE.
         (a)   Means any fee or assessment of any kind that is authorized by
state or federal law to be imposed by the city on a grantee as compensation in
the nature of rent for the grantee’s use of the public rights-of-way.
         (b)   The term FRANCHISE FEE does not include:
            1.   Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including
any such tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators
or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly
discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);
            2.   Capital costs that are required by the franchise to be
incurred by a grantee for public, educational or governmental access
facilities;
            3.   Requirements or charges that are incidental to the award or
enforcement of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds,
letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages;
or
            4.   Any fee imposed under Title 17 U.S.C.
      FRANCHISE SERVICE AREA or SERVICE AREA. The entire geographic area of the
city as it is now constituted, or may in the future be constituted, unless
otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution granting a franchise, or in
a franchise agreement.
      GRANTEE. Any person that is awarded a franchise in accordance with this
chapter, and that person’s lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
      GROSS REVENUE.
         (a)   Means all revenue that is received, directly or indirectly, by
the grantee from, or in connection with, the distribution of any cable service
within the franchise service area, and any other service provided within the
franchise service area that may, under existing or future federal law, be
included in the Communications Act definition for the purpose of calculating
and collecting the maximum allowable franchise fee for operation of the system,
whether or not authorized by any franchise, including, without limitation,
leased or access channel revenue received, directly or indirectly, from or in
connection with the distribution of any cable service. It is intended that all
revenue collected by the grantee from the provision of cable service over the
system, whether or not authorized by the franchise, be included in this
definition. GROSS REVENUE also specifically includes any revenue received, as
reasonably determined, from time to time, by the city, through any means that
is intended to have the effect of avoiding the payment of compensation that
would otherwise be paid to the city for the franchise granted, including the
fair market value of any non-monetary (i.e., barter) transactions between the
grantee and any person, but not less than the customary prices paid in
connection with equivalent transactions. GROSS REVENUE also includes any bad
debts recovered, payments received for the lease or license to third parties of
excess capacity in fiber optic cables or similar transmission facilities and
all revenue that is received by the grantee, or its subsidiaries or affiliated
companies, directly or indirectly, from or in connection with the distribution
of any service over the system or the conduct of any service-related activity
involving the system, including, without limitation, revenues derived from
advertising sales, the sale of products or services on home shopping channels
and the sale of program guides.
         (b)   GROSS REVENUE does not include:
            1.   The revenue of any person to the extent that such revenue is
also included in the gross revenue of grantee;
            2.   Taxes imposed by law on subscribers that grantee is obligated
to collect;
            3.   Amounts that must be excluded pursuant to applicable law;
            4.   Bad debt; and
            5.   Deposits and refunds.
      MULTI-CHANNEL VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTOR or VIDEO PROGRAMMING
DISTRIBUTOR. A person, such as, but not limited to, a cable system operator, an
open video system operator, a multi-channel multi-point distribution service, a
direct broadcast satellite service or a television receive-only satellite
program distributor, who makes available multiple channels of video programming
for purchase by subscribers or customers.
      OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM. A facility consisting of a set of transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service, including video programming, and that is
provided to multiple subscribers within the city; provided that the FCC has
certified that such system is authorized to operate in the city and complies
with 47 C.F.R. §§ 1500 et seq., titled “Open Video Systems.”
      OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons who provides
cable service over an open video system and directly or through one or more
affiliates owns a significant interest in that open video system, or otherwise
controls or is responsible for the management and operation of that open video
system.
      PERSON. An individual, partnership, limited liability company,
association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity.
      PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES, PEG ACCESS
FACILITIES or PEG ACCESS. The total of the following:
         (a)   Channel capacity designated for non-commercial public,
educational or government use; and
         (b)   Facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity.
      STREET or PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Each of the following that has been
dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and
is located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes,
alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property that
the city, from time to time, authorizes to be included within the definition of
a street.
      SUBSCRIBER or CUSTOMER or CONSUMER. Any person who, for any purpose,
subscribes to the services provided by a multi-channel video programming
distributor and who pays the charges for those services.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission, between or among points specified
by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT. Equipment, other than customer premises
equipment, used by a telecommunications service provider to provide
telecommunications service, including software that is integral to that
equipment.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The offering of telecommunications directly
to the public for a fee, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the equipment or facilities
that are used.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. Any provider of telecommunications
service.
      U.S.C. The United States Code. Thus, the citation of “47 U.S.C. § 153”
refers to title 47, section 153 of the United States Code.
      VIDEO PROGRAMMING PROVIDER. Any person or group of persons who has the
right under the federal copyright laws to select and to contract for the
carriage of specific video programming on a cable system or an open video
system.
      VIDEO PROVIDER. Any person, company or service that provides one or more
channels of video programming to a residence, including a home, multi-family
dwelling complex, congregate-living complex, condominium, apartment or mobile
home, where some fee is paid for that service, whether directly or as included
in dues or rental charges, and whether or not public rights-of-way are used in
the delivery of that video programming. A VIDEO PROVIDER includes, without
limitation, providers of cable television service, open video system service,
master antenna television, satellite master antenna television, direct
broadcast satellite, multi-point distribution services and other providers of
video programming, whatever their technology.
   (B)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, words, terms, phrases and
abbreviations not defined in this section will be given their meaning as used
in 47 U.S.C., as amended, and, if not defined in that Code, their meaning as
used in 47 C.F.R.
ARTICLE VI. VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT
§ 14.08.27 VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person who willfully violates any provision of this chapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided for in
Chapter 1.12.
   (B)   The misdemeanor penalty specified in division (A) above is not
applicable to a violation of any provision of this chapter for which another
sanction or penalty may be imposed under any franchise, license, lease or
similar written agreement between the city and a multi-channel video
programming distributor or other telecommunications service provider.
   (C)   The city may initiate a civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 3934, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 3952, passed 7-22-1980; Ord. MC-258, passed
3-28-1983; Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-492, passed 1-22-1986; Ord.
MC-667, passed 7-19-1989; Ord. MC-870, passed 4-20-1993; Ord. MC-1242, passed
3-20-2007; Ord. MC-1484, passed 4-18-2018)
TITLE 15: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
   Chapter
      
15.04.   BUILDING CODES
      
15.05.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
      
15.08.   LIQUEFACTION
      
15.10.   FOOTHILL FIRE ZONE BUILDING STANDARDS
      
15.11.   BUILDING SAFETY ENHANCEMENT AREA BUILDING STANDARDS
      
15.12.   EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN EXISTING BUILDINGS
      
15.16.   UNIFORM FIRE CODE
      
15.20.   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
      
15.24.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
      
15.25.   MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL HOUSING FIRE INSPECTION PROGRAM
      
15.26.   SINGLE-FAMILY RENTAL PROPERTY INSPECTION PROGRAM
      
15.27.   MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL HOUSING PROGRAM MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
      
15.28.   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
      
15.32.   RESERVED
      
15.34.   REMOVAL OR DESTRUCTION OF TREES
      
15.36.   DEMOLITION AND MOVING OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
      
15.37.   HISTORIC BUILDING DEMOLITION ORDINANCE
      
15.38.   RESERVED
      
15.40.   RESERVED
      
15.44.   RESERVED
      
15.48.   SWIMMING POOLS
      
15.52.   RESERVED
      
15.55.   CITY ASSUMPTION OF CODE ENFORCEMENT IN MOBILE HOME PARKS
      
15.56.   RESERVED
      
15.57.   CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT CONSTRUCTION TAX
      
15.60.   RESERVED
      
15.64.   RESERVED
      
15.68.   WASHERS, DRYERS, EXTRACTORS AND COMPRESSORS
      
15.72.   RESERVED
      
15.73.   VERDEMONT AREA - INFRASTRUCTURE FEE
      
15.74.   VIOLATION - PENALTY
Statutory reference:
   For provisions authorizing cities to adopt codes by reference, see Cal.
Gov’t Code, §§ 50022.1 et seq.
   For provisions authorizing cities to regulate buildings and construction,
see Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 38601 and 38660
   For provisions on the construction of housing, see Cal. Health and Safety
Code, §§ 17910 et seq.
CHAPTER 15.04: BUILDING CODES
Section
   
15.04.010   Citation
   
15.04.020   Adoption of codes
   
15.04.030   Applicability
   
15.04.040   Definition
   
15.04.050   CBC Chapter 1, Section 105.5.1 is added - prima facie evidence of
abandoned work
   
15.04.060   CBC Chapter 1, Section 112.1.1 is added - Board of Appeals
designated
   
15.04.070   CBC Chapter 1, Section 105.2, Item 2 is amended - fences not
requiring a building permit
   
15.04.080   Reserved
   
15.04.090   CBC Section 2204.1.1 is added - qualification of welding operators
   
15.04.100   CBC Section 3109.1.1 is added - barriers for swimming pools
   
15.04.110   CBC Appendix J, Section J101.3 is added - Alquist-Priolo earthquake
fault zones
   
15.04.120   CBC Appendix J, Section J101.4 is added - enforcement authority
   
15.04.130   On-site improvement permit
   
15.04.140   Preparation of grading plans
   
15.04.150   On-site improvement plans and specifications
   
15.04.160   Information on on-site improvement plans
   
15.04.170   On-site improvement plan review and permit fees
   
15.04.180   Inspection of on-site improvements
   
15.04.190   Bonds required
   
15.04.200   CBC Appendix J, Section J110.1 is added - planting of slopes
   
15.04.210   CBC Appendix J, Section J112 is added - grading operations
   
15.04.220   CBC Appendix J, Section J110.3 is added - final reports
   
15.04.230   Driveway configurations
   
15.04.240   Location of slopes
   
15.04.250   Automatic fire sprinkler systems - residential additions
   
15.04.260   Stop work order
Editor’s note:
   This chapter is added by Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016.
§ 15.04.010 CITATION.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “San Bernardino
Building Code” hereinafter referred to as the “Building Code.”
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.020 ADOPTION OF CODES.
   (A)   Except as provided in this chapter, the code currently adopted State
Building Code under Title 24, Sections Parts 1 through 6, 8, 9 and 11 of the
CCR known and designated as the 2022 California Building Codes (“CBC”), as
adopted by the State of California, based on the 2021 International Building
Code, published by the International Code Council and the Plumbing and
Mechanical Codes, written by IAPMO, and the National Electrical Code and Fire
Code, as written by NFPA, shall become the administrative provisions of the
city for regulating the construction, erection, enlargement, alteration,
repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use and
occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and/or structures in the city.
Chapter 1 of the 2022 California Building Code and all other formally adopted
building codes will be on file for public examination in the offices of the
Building Official, as required by state law.
   (B)   The city does formally adopt the state model building codes into local
law as listed below:
      (1)   2022 California Administrative Code, Title 24, Part 1;
      (2)   2022 California Building Code, Title 24, Part 2 (Volumes 1 and 2);
      (3)   2022 California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3 (based on 2017
NEC);
      (4)   2022 California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4 (based on 2018
Uniform Mechanical Code);
      (5)   2022 California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5;
      (6)   2022 California Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6;
      (7)   2022 California Historical Building Code, Title 24, Part 8;
      (8)   2022 California Fire Code, Title 24, Part 9 (specific amendments to
the California Fire Code are to be adopted by district for the greater County
Fire District and will include office of the State Fire Marshall requested
amendments);
      (9)   2022 California Green Building Standards Code, Part 11;
      (10)   Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings (“UCADB”),
1997 edition;
      (11)   International Residential Code, Appendix H, 2021 edition;
      (12)   International Property Maintenance Code (“IPMC”), 2021 edition;
and
      (13)   International Existing Building Code (“IEBC”), 2021 edition.
   (C)   Copies of all codes listed above shall be on file in the Community and
Economic Development Department office for inspection and reference and copies
of each code shall be furnished to the Building Official and each deputy. These
codes are also available for view on the International Code Conference website:
http://www.ICCsafe.org
   (D)   All sections of the code listed here and legally adopted by the State
Building Standards Commission or by the office of the State Fire Marshal shall
be formally adopted by the city as the California Building Code to be enforced
within the city limits, as required by state law. Sections and appendices not
specifically adopted by the aforementioned state offices are hereby adopted by
reference.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019; Ord. MC-1525,
passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.04.030 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, change the occupancy, alter,
repair, rehabilitate, remove, move or maintain any building or structure, or
grade or alter any land, in the city in violation of, or without complying
with, the appropriate provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The California Building Standards Code shall govern and prevail in the
event of any inconsistency or conflict between the building standards within
the California Building Standards Code, as adopted and amended by the city, and
the building standards in any other code.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.04.040 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. In the above mentioned section and codes, shall be deemed to refer to
and designate the City of San Bernardino, and any reference to any act or
legislative enactments herein referred to shall be deemed to designate and
embrace the statutes of the state, and the amendments thereof, dealing with the
subject matter thereby and therein referred to.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.050 CBC CHAPTER 1, SECTION 105.5.1 IS ADDED - PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF
ABANDONED WORK.
   Section 105.5.1, “Prima facie evidence of abandoned work:”
Failure on the part of the permittee to obtain an inspection and to demonstrate
substantial progress to the satisfaction of the Building Official within any
180-day period shall be prima facie evidence that the work has been abandoned
and the permit shall have expired.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019; Ord. MC-1525,
passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.04.060 CBC CHAPTER 1, SECTION 112.1.1 IS ADDED - BOARD OF APPEALS
DESIGNATED.
   Section 113.1.1, “Board of Appeals designated:”
1.   The Board of Building Commissioners of the City of San Bernardino shall
serve as the Board of Appeals. The Building Official or his designee shall be
Clerk of the Board. The Board shall have such duties as are delegated to it by
the California Building Code (CBC) Section 113 as adopted by the City, and
other duties as may be delegated by other provisions of the San Bernardino
Municipal Code.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019; Ord. MC-1525,
passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.04.070 CBC CHAPTER 1, SECTION 105.2, ITEM 2 IS AMENDED - FENCES NOT
REQUIRING A BUILDING PERMIT.
2.   Fences not over 6 feet high, except concrete and masonry fences greater
than three (3) feet above grade. Masonry fences shall be constructed in
accordance with the standard design specifications approved by the Building
Official, unless an alternate engineered design is submitted and approved.
Exemption from the permit requirements shall not be deemed as a waiver of the
design requirements contained in the San Bernardino Development Code as it
relates to the use or configuration of materials, or to the height of fences in
front, side or rear yards.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019; Ord. MC-1525,
passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.04.080 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.04.090 CBC SECTION 2204.1.1 IS ADDED - QUALIFICATION OF WELDING OPERATORS.
   Section 2204.1.1, “Qualification of welding operators:”
In addition to Section 2204.1, the following subsections shall govern all
welding work:
1.   All welding shall be done by qualified operators approved by the Building
Official. The Building Official shall prescribe rules and regulations for the
tests of welders, and no operator shall be approved by the Building Official
unless and until he/she has first successfully completed such tests as may be
given by the Department of Adult Vocational Education of the San Bernardino
City Schools, or San Bernardino Valley College, or has obtained such approval
because he/she holds a current welding certificate issued by an accredited
testing agency based upon the requirements of the California Department of
Adult-Vocational Education.
A certificate shall be issued to operators by the Building Official upon
successful completion of the required test or tests and/or approval as
aforesaid being obtained. Requests for the certificate shall be made by the
operator within thirty (30) days after completion of the test. The certificate
shall be valid for two years. Subsequent certificates may be obtained by
successful completion of required tests, or when the approved operator submits
sufficient evidence to the Department of Adult-Vocational Education of the San
Bernardino City Schools, or San Bernardino Valley College that he/she has
regularly engaged in such work and that such work has been satisfactorily
performed during the past year.
2.   Every welder employed for welding of steel plate of No. 8 gauge thickness
or less shall be qualified for light gauge welding. Every welder employed for
field welding shall be qualified to weld in the flat, vertical and overhead
positions. Welders, including light gauge welders who are employed for shop
welding, shall be qualified in the flat, vertical and horizontal positions.
3.   Structural steel welding operators shall be qualified as prescribed by the
latest edition of the Structural Welding Code of the American Welding Society.
4.   After a welder has passed the required tests, he/ she must be capable of
performing neat and consistently good work in actual operation. Carelessness,
inability to maintain a uniform arc and poor workmanship will be deemed
sufficient cause for revocation of the welder’s certificate.
5.   A fee of forty dollars ($ 40) will be charged by the City of San
Bernardino for each original or renewed certificate, which shall be valid for
two (2) years.
6.   At the time application is made, a certificate may be issued without
examination upon presentation of proper evidence that the welder is currently
approved for the position either by the Department of Adult-Vocational
Education or other acceptable proof of qualification.
7.   Testing shall be done under the supervision of the San Bernardino City
Schools, Department of Adult-Vocational Education of San Bernardino Valley
College or other accredited testing agency.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.100 CBC SECTION 3109.1.1 IS ADDED - BARRIERS FOR SWIMMING POOLS.
The requirements of CBC Section 3109, shall apply to single-family swimming
pool barriers. Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs for which an application for
a building permit was submitted prior to July 23, 1993 shall comply with the
requirements contained in
Chapter 15.48 of the San Bernardino Municipal Code.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.110 CBC APPENDIX J, SECTION J101.3 IS ADDED - ALQUIST-PRIOLO EARTHQUAKE
FAULT ZONES.
J101.3 Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zones. This chapter shall also include
those requirements set forth in the “Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act
(Division 2, Chapter 7.5, California Public Resources Code). This Act is
intended to represent minimum criteria for all structures that fall within the
boundaries as shown on the “Earthquake Fault Zones Maps” as prepared by the
California Division of Mines and Geology.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.120 CBC APPENDIX J, SECTION J101.4 IS ADDED - ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
J101.4 Enforcement Authority. The Building Official of the City of San
Bernardino or his/ her designee shall have the authority for the enforcement of
CBC Appendix J and any amendments thereto.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.04.130 ON-SITE IMPROVEMENT PERMIT.
   No person shall construct any on-site improvement for motor vehicle parking
or vehicle circulation, the disposal of waste through a private sewer main, the
conveyance of storm waters or landscaping and irrigation systems, without first
obtaining a permit from the Building Official. A permit issued by the Building
Official, for the purpose of construction of the improvements, set forth
herein, shall hereafter be known as an “on-site improvement permit.”
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.140 PREPARATION OF GRADING PLANS.
   A grading plan and a grading permit shall be required for any grading
activity involving more than 50 cubic yards. All grading plans shall be
prepared by a registered civil engineer.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.150 ON-SITE IMPROVEMENT PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   When required by the Building Official, plans and specifications, and
verification of land use entitlement, shall accompany each application for an
on-site improvement permit. Plans and specifications required by the Building
Official shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer.
Specifications may be incorporated into the plans as general notes in lieu of a
separate document. Verification of land use entitlement requirements are
incorporated into the Grading Policy promulgated by the Department of Community
Development and Housing.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 15.04.160 INFORMATION ON ON-SITE IMPROVEMENT PLANS.
   On-site improvement plans shall contain all information set forth in CBC
Chapter 1, § 105.3 and shall include additional information as required by the
Building Official.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.170 ON-SITE IMPROVEMENT PLAN REVIEW AND PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   When an on-site improvement plan is required to be submitted, a plan
review fee shall be paid at the time of submittal of plans and specifications.
Items to be reviewed shall be improvements including, but not limited to,
paving, curbs, sidewalks, private sewer mains, drainage facilities, landscaping
and irrigation systems.
   (B)   Fees for each on-site improvement permit shall be paid to the city at
the time of permit issuance. Said on-site plan review and permit fees shall be
in an amount established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.180 INSPECTION OF ON-SITE IMPROVEMENTS.
   All on-site improvements for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by the Building Official, or his or her designee.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.190 BONDS REQUIRED.
   (A)   A grading permit shall not be issued unless the applicant has first
posted with the Building Official a good and sufficient surety bond, cash,
letter of credit (LC) or certificate of deposit in such an amount as the
Building Official shall estimate and determine to be necessary to cover the
total cost of the project, including corrective work necessary to remove and
eliminate geological hazards. The Building Official shall require a written
itemized estimate of the costs of the grading. The amount of the required bond,
cash, instrument of credit or certificate of deposit is based on the estimate
of cost and shall be given to the owner or applicant prior to the issuance of
the permit.
   (B)   When security for the grading is provided for a development on the
site where the grading is to be done, the bond for the grading required shall
be released upon submission of evidence by the permittee to the Building
Official that the grading work is complete and signed off by the construction
engineer.
   (C)   An agreement between the Redevelopment Agency, the Inland Valley
Development Agency or the San Bernardino International Airport Authority, and
the city, approved by the City Attorney and unconditionally providing and
guaranteeing that said Agency shall provide those grading and other
improvements and pay the costs thereof required, may be filed with the Building
Official as security in lieu of said bond, cash or certificate of deposit
wherever said project is located in a redevelopment project area and the
agreement recites that the street improvements are in compliance with the
Redevelopment Plan for said area and in furtherance of the public interest in
promoting public or private development.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.200 CBC APPENDIX J, SECTION J110.1 IS ADDED - PLANTING OF SLOPES.
J110.1.1 Planting of Slopes. The Building Official may waive the planting of
any slope less than 5 feet in vertical height. An automatic irrigation system
shall be installed for planted slopes unless recommended otherwise in the
preliminary soils report or waived by the Building Official. If required by the
Building Official, a recommendation for types of planting materials shall be
obtained from a Landscape Architect. The Landscape Architect shall, prior to
final inspection, provide the Building Official with a statement that the
planting has been done in accordance with his recommendations approved by the
Building Official.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.210 CBC APPENDIX J, SECTION J112 IS ADDED - GRADING OPERATIONS.
J112.1 General. All parties performing grading operations, under a grading
permit issued by the Building Official, shall have verification of land use
entitlement and shall take reasonable preventive measures, as directed by the
Building Official and incorporated into the Grading Policy promulgated by the
Community Development Department, to avoid earth or other materials from the
premises being deposited onto adjacent streets or properties, by the action of
storm waters or wind, by spillage from conveyance vehicles or by other causes.
Grading operations of 50 cubic yards or more shall be performed by qualified
individuals/entities demonstrating proficiency in grading operations to the
satisfaction of the Building Official or the Building officials designated
representative or observed and supervised by such an individual. Typical
qualified individuals would include a licensed contractor, geologist or
engineer.
J112.2 Removal of Materials Within 24 Hours. Earth or other materials which are
deposited on adjacent streets or properties shall be completely removed by the
permittee as soon as practical, but in any event within 24 hours after receipt
of written notice from the Building Official, or NPDES Coordinator, or their
designees, to remove the earth or materials, or within such additional time as
may be allowed by written notice.
J112.3 Noncompliance. In the event that any party performing grading shall fail
to comply with the requirements of this Section, the Building Official shall
have the authority to engage the services of a contractor to remove the earth
or other materials. All charges incurred for the services of the contractor
shall be paid to the City by the permittee prior to acceptance of the grading.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016; Ord. MC-1525, passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643,
passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.04.220 CBC APPENDIX J, SECTION J110.3 IS ADDED - FINAL REPORTS.
J110.3 Final Reports. A statement from the Landscape Architect shall be
submitted to the City Engineer stating that the planting and irrigation system
(s) have been installed in accordance with his recommendations.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.230 DRIVEWAY CONFIGURATIONS.
   (A)   Driveways to residential garages of more than 30 feet in length shall
extend for a minimum distance of 20 feet from the garage on a maximum grade of
5%. Driveways less than 30 feet in length shall have a maximum grade of 8% for
a minimum distance of 20 feet from the garage. No portion of a driveway shall
exceed a grade of 20%.
   (B)   Driveways shall be designed so that the algebraic difference in grades
will not cause a car to drag or hang up.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.240 LOCATION OF SLOPES.
   Slopes shall be positioned on the downhill lot unless waived by the City
Engineer.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 15.04.250 AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS - RESIDENTIAL ADDITIONS.
   The authority to require passive fire suppression (sprinklers) for
residential additions will be determined by the acting Fire Authority based on
availability of water and existing hydrants fire flow within the area of the
proposed structure.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016; Ord. MC-1525, passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643,
passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.04.260 STOP WORK ORDER.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who continues work on a building or
structure after a stop work order has been issued by any of the employees
listed in §
9.90.010(A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(6) or (A)(8) shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   Each day during any part of which the activity prohibited by division
(A) above continues shall be a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. MC-1433, passed 12-21-2016)
CHAPTER 15.05: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
   
15.05.010   Citation of sections
   
15.05.020   Section 102.3 amended
   
15.05.030   Section 103.1 amended
   
15.05.040   Section 104.3 amended
   
15.05.050   Section 106.4 amended
   
15.05.060   Section 107.1 amended
   
15.05.070   Section 111 amended
   
15.05.080   Section 112.4 amended
   
15.05.090   Section 201.3 amended
   
15.05.100   Section 302.4 amended
   
15.05.110   Section 302.9 amended
   
15.05.120   Section 304.3 amended
   
15.05.130   Section 304.14 amended
   
15.05.140   Section 304.18 amended
   
15.05.150   Section 307 amended
   
15.05.160   Section 401.3 amended
   
15.05.170   Section 502.5 amended
   
15.05.180   Section 505.1 amended
   
15.05.190   Section 602.2 amended
   
15.05.200   Section 602.3 amended
   
15.05.210   Section 602.4 amended
   
15.05.220   Section 604.2 amended
   
15.05.230   Section 604.3.1.1 amended
   
15.05.240   Section 604.3.2.1 amended
   
15.05.250   Section 702.1 amended
   
15.05.260   Section 702.2 amended
   
15.05.270   Section 702.3 amended
   
15.05.280   Section 704.1 amended
   
15.05.290   Section 704.2 amended
   
15.05.300   Vacant building board-up standards
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code (“IPMC”), 2018 edition,
see §
15.04.020
§ 15.05.010 CITATION OF SECTIONS.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Property Maintenance Code,” and may be
cited as such. For purposes of citation, the International Property Maintenance
Code, 2021 edition, published by the International Code Conference, adopted by
reference and amended by the city, is renumbered by adding “15.05.” before each
section.
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019; Ord. MC-1525,
passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.05.020 SECTION 102.3 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 102.3 is amended to read as
follows.
102.3 “Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of
occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of
the California Administrative Code, California Building Code, California Energy
Code, California Historical Building Code, California Existing Building Code,
California Fire Code, California Plumbing Code, California Mechanical Code, and
California Electrical Code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel,
modify or set aside any provision of the San Bernardino Municipal Code.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.030 SECTION 103.1 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 103.1 is amended to read as
follows.
103.1 “The Chief of Police or the Director of Community Development and Housing
or their authorized representatives shall be known as the code official as
referenced in the International Property Maintenance Code.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019; Ord. MC-1625,
passed 2-21-2024)
§ 15.05.040 SECTION 104.3 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 104.3 is amended to add the
following phrase to the end of the last sentence: “including the warrant
provisions of Section 1822.50 et seq. of the Code of Civil Procedure of the
State of California.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.050 SECTION 106.4 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 106.4 is amended to read as
follows.
106.4 “Violation penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
title, including, but not limited to, adopted model codes, as amended in this
title, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Chapters 1.12, 9.92 and
9.93 of the San Bernardino Municipal Code.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.060 SECTION 107.1 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 107.1 is amended to read as
follows.
107.1 “Notice to Person Responsible. Whenever the code official determines that
there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a
violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in
Sections 107.2 and 107.3, or in the manner provided by San Bernardino Municipal
Code Section 9.92.050, to the person responsible for the violation as specified
in this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with
Section 108.3.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.070 SECTION 111 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 111 and subsections are amended
to read as follows.
111 “A party aggrieved by a notice or order issued under this code may appeal
in the manner set forth in Chapter 9.94 of the San Bernardino Municipal Code.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.080 SECTION 112.4 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 112.4, “Failure to comply,” is
amended to read as follows.
112.4 Failure to Comply “Any person, firm or corporation who continues work on
a building or structure after a stop work order has been issued by any of the
employees listed in [SBMC] 9.90.010 A(2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or 8) shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each day of the violation. Each day during any part of which the activity
prohibited by subdivision 112. 1 of this section continues shall be a distinct
and separate offense.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.090 SECTION 201.3 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 201.3 is amended to read as
follows.
201.3 Definitions. “Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in
the California Administrative Code, California Building Code, California
Residential Code, California Green Building Standards Code, California Energy
Code, California Historical Building Code, California Existing Building Code,
California Fire Code, California Plumbing Code, California Mechanical Code, or
California Electrical Code, or any code adopted by reference under Chapter 15
of the San Bernardino Municipal Code, such terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as stated in those codes.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.100 SECTION 302.4 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 302.4, paragraph number one, is
amended to read as follows.
302.4 Weeds “Weed and rubbish abatement shall be as set forth in the San
Bernardino Municipal Code, Chapter 8.30, Abatement of Public Nuisances.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.110 SECTION 302.9 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 302.9, “Defacement of property,”
is deleted.
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.120 SECTION 304.3 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 304.3 is amended to read as
follows.
304.3 Premises Identification “Premises identification shall be as set forth in
the San Bernardino Municipal Code sections 12.32.030 and/or 15.16.126.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.130 SECTION 304.14 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 304.14 is deleted.
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.140 SECTION 304.18 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 304.18 is deleted.
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.150 SECTION 307 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 307, “Handrails and guardrails,”
is amended to read as follows.
307 Handrails and Guardrails “Every exterior and interior flight of stairs
shall have a handrail and guard per the requirements of the adopting code at
the time the building was permitted. Handrails and guardrails shall be
maintained in a safe and useful condition.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.160 SECTION 401.3 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 401.3 is amended to read as
follows.
401.3 Alternative Devices “In lieu of the means for natural light and
ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation
complying with the California Building Code or California Residential Code
shall be permitted.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.170 SECTION 502.5 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 502.5, “Public toilet
facilities,” is amended to read as follows.
502.5 Public Toilet Facilities “Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in
a safe sanitary and working condition in accordance with the California
Plumbing Code. Except for periodic maintenance or cleaning, public access and
use shall be provided to the toilet facilities at all times during occupancy of
the premises.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.180 SECTION 505.1 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 505.1, “Plumbing Fixture
Connections,” is amended to read as follows.
505.1 Plumbing Fixture Connections “General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or
shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be
properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private
water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and
showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in
accordance with the California Plumbing Code.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.190 SECTION 602.2 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 602.2, “Heating facilities,” is
amended to read as follows.
602.2 Heating Facilities “Residential occupancies. Interior spaces intended for
human occupancy shall be provided with permanently-installed heating facilities
capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees F (20 C) in all
habitable rooms.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.200 SECTION 602.3 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 602.3, “Heat supply,” Exceptions
#1 and #2 are deleted.
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.210 SECTION 602.4 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 602.4, “Occupiable work spaces,”
is deleted.
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.220 SECTION 604.2 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 604.2, “Service,” is amended to
read as follows.
604.2 “Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a
basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the
California Electrical Code. Dwelling units shall be served by a three- wire,
120/ 240 volt, single phase electrical service having a rating of not less than
60 amperes.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.230 SECTION 604.3.1.1 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 604.3.1.1, “Electrical
equipment,” is amended to read as follows.
604.3.1.1 Electrical Equipment “Electrical equipment. Electrical distribution
equipment, motor circuits, power equipment, transformers, wire, cable, flexible
cords, wiring devices, ground fault circuit interrupters, arc fault circuit
interruptors, surge protectors, molded case circuit breakers, low-voltage
fuses, luminaires, ballasts, motors and electronic control, signaling and
communication equipment that have been exposed to water shall be replaced in
accordance with the provisions of the California Electrical Code. The exception
provisions of section 604.3.1.1 of the IPMC are hereby deleted.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.240 SECTION 604.3.2.1 AMENDED.
   (A)   International Property Maintenance Code, § 604.3.2.1, “Electrical
equipment,” is amended to read as follows.
604.3.2.1 Electrical Equipment “Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures,
including furnace, waterheating, security system and power distribution
circuits, that have been exposed to fire, shall be replaced in accordance with
the provisions of the California Building Code, or California Electrical Code.”
   (B)   The exception provisions of § 604.3.2.1 of the IPMC are deleted.
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.250 SECTION 702.1 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 702.1, “General,” is amended to
read as follows.
702.1 General “General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel
shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way.
Means of egress shall comply with the California Fire Code, California
Residential Code, or the California Building Code, whichever is more
restrictive.”
§ 15.05.260 SECTION 702.2 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 702.2, “Aisles,” is amended to
read as follows.
702.2 Aisles “Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the
California Fire Code, California Residential Code, California Building Code, or
Civil Code 304.18, whichever is more restrictive, shall be unobstructed.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.270 SECTION 702.3 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 702.3, “Locked doors,” is amended
to read as follows.
702.3 Locked Doors “Locked Doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily
openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for
keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to
that permitted by the California Fire Code, California Building Code, or
California Residential Code, whichever is more restrictive.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.280 SECTION 704.1 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 704.1, “General,” is amended to
read as follows.
704.1 Fire Protection Systems “General. All systems, devices and equipment to
detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any
combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times
in accordance with the California Fire Code.”
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.290 SECTION 704.2 AMENDED.
   International Property Maintenance Code, § 704.2, “Smoke alarms,” is amended
to read as follows.
704.2 Smoke Alarms “Smoke alarms. Smoke alarms shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with the California Fire Code, California Residential
Code, or the California Building Code, whichever is more restrictive
(Ord. MC-1417, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.05.300 VACANT BUILDING BOARD-UP STANDARDS.
   (A)   Vacant and abandoned buildings shall be boarded pursuant to the
following guidelines, which are modeled after, in part, guidelines of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
      (1)   Board requirements.
         (a)   All first floor windows and doors and all basement windows and
doors should have plywood covering the entire opening and frame.
         (b)   The covering should be secured with carriage bolts.
         (c)   Any health and safety hazard caused by any protruding bolts used
to secure boarding must be eliminated.
         (d)   The use of nails is prohibited.
         (e)   There shall be no boarding above the first floor unless entry is
possible without use of a ladder, and the opening is large enough for a person
to easily pass through; openings above the first floor that do not meet this
test should be secured but not boarded.
         (f)   If security bars are located on windows/doors, boarding is not
required.
         (g)   Openings too small for a person to pass through, particularly
pet openings in doors, should be secured but not boarded.
         (h)   To ensure that no hazards exist, remove all broken glass from
the windows and surrounding interior and exterior areas.
      (2)   Specifications for plywood boarding.
         (a)   Exterior plywood should be of un-sanded CDX grade.
         (b)   Plywood thickness should be one-half-inch for window openings,
five-eighths-inch for door openings and three-fourths inch for sliding door and
French door openings. When extra large window openings are encountered, use
five-eighths-inch or three-fourths-inch, as necessary.
         (c)   All holes should be drilled to accommodate bolts. The holes in
the top of the plywood should be 12 inches down from the top and 20% of the
width of the plywood cover, in from the side.
         (d)   The holes in the bottom should be 25% of the height of the
plywood, up from the bottom and the same distance in from the side as the top.
         (e)   Carriage bolts mated with nut and two three-inch flat washers as
shown in the side view. Washers to be of sufficient size to fully accept the
square portion of bolt beneath head. Bolt and mating hardware may be galvanized
or cadmium plated. Three-eighths-inch by 12-inch bolts should be supplied with
each two-foot, eight-inch door; three-foot door; and glass sliding door cover.
Three-eighths by ten-inch bolts should be supplied with the rest.
         (f)   Two-inch by four-inch lumber should be graded and should be a
minimum of 16 inches longer than the width of the plywood cover. (Note: two by
fours will be drilled with one-half-inch diameter holes that line up with the
holes in the plywood covers.)
         (g)   All windows and doors, except the front door, through which
access to the interior of the dwelling is made, should be secured. All window
boards will be cut to fit inside the concrete block or brick opening with a
maximum one-eighth-inch clearance. The plywood covering should be of one
continuous piece when possible.
         (h)   All fabricated parts and ancillary materials become property of
the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
         (i)   All coverings are to be fabricated according to the attached
drawing and specifications.
      (3)   Boarding windows.
         (a)   Except as noted below, all window sashes, frames, glass and
hardware are to be undamaged by the boarding installation.
         (b)   All screen inserts are to be removed, marked as to location and
stored in a convenient closet or in the utility room.
         (c)   In all cases where it is possible to adjust the position of the
sashes to accommodate the specifications for boarding above, the sashes are to
remain in the frame.
         (d)   In instances wherein the sashes cannot be adjusted to
accommodate the boarding specifications above, the sashes are to be removed
from the frames and stored in a convenient closet or in the utility room. This
includes all stationary lights secured by stops.
         (e)   In cases wherein the sash cannot be removed and/or the frame is
permanently built into the house and cannot be removed (i.e., Fenestra
windows), it will be necessary to break the corner panes to accommodate the
boarding and bolts. If the location of bolt holes, in the plywood, requires
modification because of the muntin bar (a small bar that divides a windows
glass), these locations are to be modified. In no case, in any type of window,
is any sash or frame part to be damaged.
         (f)   In all instances where items should be removed from the frame
and stored, the items should be clearly marked as to the area from which it was
removed.
         (g)   All items are to be stored on edge and braced to prevent
accidental tipping, sliding and the like. In no instance is any item to be
stored laid flat.
         (h)   Hinged windows are to be completely removed from the frame and
stored as stated in (A)(3)(g) above. If possible, the hinge pins are to be
removed and remain with the removed item.
         (i)   Faced nailing of panels to wood frame windows is prohibited.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the penalty provisions of
Chapters 1.12,
9.92 and
9.93.
(Ord. MC-1576, passed 5-4-2022)
CHAPTER 15.08: LIQUEFACTION
Section
   
15.08.010   Findings
   
15.08.020   Purpose
   
15.08.030   Scope - map
   
15.08.040   Liquefaction defined
   
15.08.050   Reports required
   
15.08.060   Reserved
   
15.08.070   Administration and enforcement
   
15.08.080   Compliance required prior to issuance of permits
   
15.08.090   Appeal
§ 15.08.010 FINDINGS.
   Local governing bodies are required to adopt policies for the protection of
the community against geologic and seismic hazards, pursuant to Cal. Gov’t
Code, § 65302. The primary geologic and seismic hazards that could potentially
affect the city include fault rupture, ground shaking, historic high ground
water and soil matrix. These hazards could cause liquefaction resulting in
extensive property damage and loss of life in susceptible areas of the city.
Liquefaction reports, plus mitigation measures, for new development in
susceptible areas will greatly reduce the risk of damage from liquefaction
induced building failures during an earthquake occurrence.
(Ord. MC-676, passed 9-19-1989)
§ 15.08.020 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this code is to reduce the potential risk of property damage
and loss of life due to liquefaction induced building failures during an
earthquake occurrence by requiring liquefaction reports and mitigation measures
for development in areas susceptible to liquefaction within this jurisdiction.
(Ord. MC-676, passed 9-19-1989)
§ 15.08.030 SCOPE - MAP.
   The map is included in the general plan indicating areas of liquefaction
susceptibility. All new development projects, or structural modifications over
25% of the building area, which are located within the areas of liquefaction
susceptibility as determined by the latest adopted edition of the general plan
map (“map”) may be required to provide liquefaction reports and mitigation
measures. The liquefaction susceptibility areas indicated on the map have a
historic high ground water table within 30 feet of the surface.
(Ord. MC-676, passed 9-19-1989)
§ 15.08.040 LIQUEFACTION DEFINED.
   LIQUEFACTION is defined as the transformation of a granular material from a
solid state into a liquefied state as a consequence of increased pore-water
pressures. Soils and clastic sediment with particle size in the medium sand to
silt range, as determined by the Unified Soils Classification System, are
particularly susceptible to LIQUEFACTION when they are saturated with water and
shaken by an earthquake. LIQUEFACTION at or near the surface can result in
foundation failure and property damage.
(Ord. MC-676, passed 9-19-1989)
§ 15.08.050 REPORTS REQUIRED.
   A liquefaction report, plus mitigation measures, prepared by a Registered
Civil Engineer shall be required by the Director of Development Services for
new construction or structural modification of more than 25% of the building
area for the buildings or structures listed below which fall within the high
liquefaction susceptibility areas as indicated on the map:
   (A)   Essential facilities, as defined in Section 1604.5 Risk Category,
which includes Table 1604.5 “Risk Category of Buildings and Other Structures”
of the California Building Code, including, but not limited to, hospitals and
other emergency medical facilities, fire and police stations and government
disaster operation and communication centers.
   (B)   Buildings where the primary occupancy is for assembly use for more
than 50 persons in one room;
   (C)   Buildings over two stories in height;
   (D)   Buildings with the following occupancies, as listed in the California
Building Code:
      (1)   Group A, (Assembly) Divisions 1, 2 and 2.1;
      (2)   Group E, (Educational) Division 1;
      (3)   Group H, (High Hazard) Divisions 1 and 2; and
      (4)   Group I, (Institutional) Divisions 1 and 2.
   (E)   Buildings with an occupant load of more than 300, as determined Table
1004.1.2 of the California Building Code;
   (F)   Underground tanks of more than 5,000 gallons, for storage of toxic,
hazardous or flammable materials;
   (G)   Tanks with a height of more than 35 feet; and
   (H)   Towers with a height of more than 35 feet.
(Ord. MC-676, passed 9-19-1989; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1525,
passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.08.060 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Ord. MC-1525, passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.08.070 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The Director of Development Services shall promulgate written procedures,
regulations, guidelines and fees pertaining to the implementation and
enforcement of this chapter. Such procedures, regulations, guidelines and fees
shall not become effective until they have been approved by the Mayor and City
Council.
(Ord. MC-676, passed 9-19-1989; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 15.08.080 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   Any person, business, organization or corporation failing to provide the
required liquefaction reports and mitigation measures to the Director of
Development Services in compliance with this chapter shall be denied issuance
of grading and building permits.
(Ord. MC-676, passed 9-19-1989; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 15.08.090 APPEAL.
   Any interested person aggrieved by the determination of the Director of
Development Services may appeal the decision to the Mayor and City Council in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2.64.
(Ord. MC-676, passed 9-19-1989; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
CHAPTER 15.10: FOOTHILL FIRE ZONE BUILDING STANDARDS
Section
   
15.10.020   Purpose
   
15.10.030   Very high fire hazard severity zones
   
15.10.040   CBC Section 701A.3.2 is added - existing structures
   
15.10.060   Applicability
   
15.10.080   Applicable building standards
§ 15.10.020 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and welfare by
reducing the risk of injury, death or property damage that may result from
wild-land fires in the foothill areas of the city. The building standards
contained in this chapter are intended to prevent the ignition of, or otherwise
reduce the spread of fire on developed properties, by controlling the use of
materials and methods of construction.
(Ord. MC-960, passed 3-6-1996; Ord. MC-1162, passed 1-6-2004; Ord. MC-1163,
passed 1-23-2004)
§ 15.10.030 VERY HIGH FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONES.
   Very high fire hazard severity zones are designated in the city as
recommended by the Director of the State Department of Forestry and Fire
Protection within the city, as depicted on a map titled “City of San Bernardino
Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones,” dated October 29, 2008, on file at the
office of the City Clerk, 300 N. D Street, San Bernardino, California.
(Ord. MC-1309, passed 7-6-2009)
§ 15.10.040 CBC SECTION 701A.3.2 IS ADDED - EXISTING STRUCTURES.
701A.3.2 Existing Structures. For existing structures, retrofitting of an
element is required when more than 60% replacement of that element occurs. An
addition to an existing structure need not comply with these standards if the
addition does not exceed 60% of the floor are of the existing structure and the
existing structure was not required to meet these construction standards when
originally constructed. Retrofitting of an entire structure is required when a
combination of elements are replaced or other repairs are made equal in value
to 60% or more of the replacement cost of the structure as determined by the
building official. Alterations made to a structure shall not increase the
degree of non-conformity in regards to these standards.
(Ord. MC-1337, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. MC-1395, passed 1-6-2014)
§ 15.10.060 APPLICABILITY.
   The requirements of this chapter shall apply to those properties located in
foothill fire zones A, B or C, as defined in Chapter 19.15, and those
properties located in a very high fire hazard severity zone, as designated by
the state.
(Ord. MC-960, passed 3-6-1996; Ord. MC-1162, passed 1-6-2004; Ord. MC-1163,
passed 1-23-2004; Ord. MC-1261, passed 12-4-2007; Ord. MC-1262, passed 12-18-
2007)
§ 15.10.080 APPLICABLE BUILDING STANDARDS.
   (A)   The building standards contained in the California Building Code,
Chapter 7A, shall apply in the foothill fire zones and in state designated very
high fire hazard severity zones.
   (B)   In addition, the following requirements shall apply as noted herein.
      (1)   Fencing shall be of approved noncombustible or ignition-resistant
material.
      (2)   Vinyl window frame assemblies shall have the following
characteristics:
         (a)   Frames shall have welded corners and metal reinforcement in the
interlock area;
         (b)   Dual-paned insulated glazed units with at least one pane of
tempered glass;
         (c)   Frame and sash profiles are certified in AAMA Lineal
Certification Program (verified by an AAMA product label or a Certified
Products Directory); and
         (d)   Certified and labeled to ANSI/AAMA/NWWDA 101/I.S.2-97 for
structural requirements.
      (3)   Roof mounted turbine vents shall not be permitted
      (4)   All roof coverings shall be of non-wood materials with at least a
Class A fire-retardant rating.
      (5)   Paper-faced insulation shall be prohibited in attics or ventilated
spaces.
(Ord. MC-960, passed 3-6-1996; Ord. MC-1162, passed 1-6-2004; Ord. MC-1163,
passed 1-23-2004; Ord. MC-1261, passed 12-4-2007; Ord. MC-1262, passed 12-18-
2007; Ord. MC-1337, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. MC-1395, passed 1-6-2014; Ord. MC-
1525, passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed 10-2-2024)
CHAPTER 15.11: BUILDING SAFETY ENHANCEMENT AREA BUILDING STANDARDS
Section
   
15.11.020   Purpose
   
15.11.040   Scope/applicability
   
15.11.080   Building safety enhancement area building standards
§ 15.11.020 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and welfare by
reducing the risk of injury, death or property damage that may result from
urban conflagrations spread by high winds. The building standards contained in
this chapter are intended to prevent the ignition of or otherwise reduce the
spread of urban fire by controlling the use of materials and methods of
construction.
§ 15.11.040 SCOPE/APPLICABILITY.
   The Building Safety Enhancement Area Building Standards shall apply to all
newly constructed buildings, structures or appurtenances outside the foothill
fire zones (as defined in Chapter 19.15) and located in any of the following
areas:
   (A)   Those areas of the city designated by Council resolution after a
noticed public hearing as being located within a building safety enhancement
area as follows:
      (1)   Four or more abutting (as defined in Chapter 19.02 of the
Development Code) parcels with at least four dwellings with each dwelling
damaged over 60% by fire or other catastrophe; and
      (2)   All dwellings and commercial structures damaged over 60% by fire or
other catastrophe that are located within a block (as defined in Chapter 19.02
of the Development Code) in which 50% or more of the dwellings and commercial
structures have each incurred damage over 60% by fire or other catastrophe.
   (B)   Those new residential housing tracts comprised of four or more
dwelling units for which building permit applications are submitted after the
effective date of this chapter; and
   (C)   Those new commercial structures that are 5,000 square feet or larger,
for which building permit applications are submitted after the effective date
of this chapter.
§ 15.11.080 BUILDING SAFETY ENHANCEMENT AREA BUILDING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Exterior walls. Exterior walls shall be constructed of non-combustible
materials or shall provide the equivalent to a minimum of one-hour fire
resistance rated construction on the exterior side.
   (B)   Eaves. Eaves shall be enclosed with a minimum seven-eighths-inch
stucco or equivalent protection.
   (C)   Exterior glazing. Exterior glazing shall comply with the provisions of
the California Building Code and with the following additional requirements.
      (1)   Exterior windows, window walls and glazed doors, and windows within
exterior doors, shall be tempered glass, or multi-layered glass panels (dual-
or triple-paned), or other assemblies approved by the Building Official.
      (2)   Vinyl window frame assemblies shall be prohibited, except when they
have the following characteristics:
         (a)   Frame and sash are comprised of vinyl material with welded
corners;
         (b)   Metal reinforcement in the interlock area;
         (c)   Glazed with insulated glass or tempered;
         (d)   Frame and sash profiles are certified in AAMA lineal
certification program (verified with either an AAMA product label or certified
products directory);
         (e)   Certified and labeled to ANSI/AAMA/NWWDA 101/I.S.2-97 for
structural requirements; and
         (f)   Except when needed to meet the requirements of the California
Energy Code at Title 24, Part 6 of the Cal. Code of Regulations.
   (D)   Garage doors. Garage doors shall be constructed of non-combustible
materials or fire retardant treated wood.
   (E)   Vents.
      (1)   All vents shall be covered with one-eighths-inch mesh corrosion-
resistant metal screen or other approved material that offers equivalent
protection.
      (2)   Roof-mounted turbine vents shall not be permitted.
   (F)   Insulation. Paper-faced insulation shall be prohibited in attics or
ventilated spaces.
   (G)   Roof covering. All roof covering shall be of non-wood materials with
at least a Class A or B fire-retardant rating. The open ends of high-profile
tile roofs shall be capped with non-ignitable material to prevent birds’ nests
or other combustible material from accumulating. Gutters and downspouts shall
be constructed of non-combustible material.
   (H)   Fences. Where wood or vinyl fencing is used, there shall be a minimum
of five feet separation between the wood or vinyl fencing and the wall of the
nearest structure, except on those properties where previous construction
occurred pursuant to a previous code. Fencing within the five feet separation
area shall be of non-combustible material or one-hour fire-resistance-rated
construction.
(Ord. MC-1162, passed 1-6-2004; Ord. MC-1163, passed 1-23-2004)
CHAPTER 15.12: EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN EXISTING BUILDINGS
Section
   
15.12.010   Reserved
   
15.12.020   Reserved
   
15.12.030   Reserved
   
15.12.040   Reserved
   
15.12.050   Reserved
   
15.12.060   Reserved
   
15.12.070   Reserved
   
15.12.080   Reserved
   
15.12.090   Reserved
   
15.12.100   Reserved
   
15.12.110   Reserved
   
15.12.120   Reserved
   
15.12.130   Reserved
   
15.12.140   Reserved
   
15.12.200   Sign posting
   
15.12.300   Vacant unreinforced masonry buildings
§ 15.12.010 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1261, passed 12-4-2007 and Ord. MC-1262, passed 12-18-
2007)
§ 15.12.020 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1053, passed 8-4-1999)
§ 15.12.030 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1053, passed 8-4-1999)
§ 15.12.040 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1053, passed 8-4-1999)
§ 15.12.050 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-873, passed 5-26-1993)
§ 15.12.060 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-873, passed 5-26-1993)
§ 15.12.070 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-873, passed 5-26-1993)
§ 15.12.080 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-873, passed 5-26-1993)
§ 15.12.090 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-873, passed 5-26-1993)
§ 15.12.100 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1053, passed 8-4-1999)
§ 15.12.110 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1053, passed 8-4-1999)
§ 15.12.120 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1053, passed 8-4-1999)
§ 15.12.130 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1053, passed 8-4-1999)
§ 15.12.140 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1053, passed 8-4-1999)
§ 15.12.200 SIGN POSTING.
   (A)   Any building owner who has received actual or constructive notice from
the Building Official that a building located in the city is constructed of
unreinforced masonry shall post, in a conspicuous place at the entrance of said
building, on a sign not less than five inches by seven inches, the following
statement, pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, § 8875.8, printed in not less than 30-
point bold type:
This is an unreinforced masonry building. Unreinforced masonry buildings may be
unsafe in the event of a major earthquake.
   (B)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, § 8875.9, this section shall not apply to
unreinforced masonry construction if the walls are non-load bearing with steel
or concrete frame.
   (C)   Section 15.74.010 shall not apply to any violation of this section.
   (D)   (1)   If the owner of a building is not in compliance with the posting
requirements of division (A) above on or after December 31, 2004, and the owner
has received actual or constructive notice from the Building Official that
their building is of unreinforced masonry construction and has not been
retrofitted to the standards identified in §
15.12.010, the owner shall post and maintain, in a conspicuous place at the
entrance of the building, a sign not less than eight inches by ten inches with
the following statement, with the first two words printed in 50-point bold type
and the remaining words in at least 30-point type:
“Earthquake Warning. This is an unreinforced masonry building. You may not be
safe inside or near unreinforced masonry buildings during an earthquake.”
      (2)   The posting shall be visible from the exterior entrance of the
building.
      (3)   An owner who is subject to this section and who does not comply
with the posting requirements shall be subject to an administrative citation
pursuant to
Chapter 9.92 and subject to an administrative fine of $250 no sooner than 15
days after notification by the Building Official that the owner is subject to
the administrative fine.
      (4)   Thereafter, if the owner does not comply with and maintain
compliance with the posting requirements, within 30 days of the first
administrative fine, the owner shall be subject to an additional administrative
citation and an additional administrative fine of $1,000.
(Ord. MC-1053, passed 8-4-1999; Ord. MC-1215, passed 2-22-2006)
§ 15.12.300 VACANT UNREINFORCED MASONRY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Any unreinforced masonry building that has been continuously vacant or
abandoned for a period of one year or more shall be strengthened to comply with
the standards identified in §
15.12.010 prior to re-occupancy. A vacancy, as determined by the Building
Official, has occurred when there is no lawful occupancy or business activity
within the structure for one year. The lack of business registration records,
business receipts, utility and other records for a given period may be used to
determine if a vacancy has occurred.
   (B)   Any unreinforced masonry building that has been continuously vacant or
abandoned for a period of three years or more shall be considered a public
nuisance and shall be subject to abatement as a public nuisance in accordance
with
Chapter 8.30. Once deemed to be a public nuisance, the building shall be
strengthened in accordance with the standards identified in §
15.12.010, or demolished, or the hazards associated with the building shall be
otherwise mitigated to the satisfaction of the Building Official.
(Ord. MC-1215, passed 2-22-2006)
CHAPTER 15.16: UNIFORM FIRE CODE
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1422, passed 5-16-2016)
Editor’s note:
   On July 1, 2016 the city annexed into the County Fire Protection District.
The County Fire Code, and other ordinances, were ratified by the Mayor and City
Council pursuant to Ord. MC-1422.
CHAPTER 15.20: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
Section
   
15.20.010   Purpose
   
15.20.020   Definitions
   
15.20.030   Certificate of occupancy required
   
15.20.040   Conditions requiring application
   
15.20.050   Application process
   
15.20.070   Temporary certificate of occupancy
   
15.20.080   Revocation of certificate of occupancy
   
15.20.090   Hearings
   
15.20.100   Connection/disconnection of utilities
   
15.20.110   Violation
§ 15.20.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public from unsafe and
substandard buildings, to prevent the deterioration of buildings and to prevent
future blight and decline of property values through a program of required
inspection and certification.
(Ord. MC-670, passed 7-19-1989; Ord. MC-671, passed 7-26-1989)
§ 15.20.020 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as otherwise defined in this chapter, all terms used in this chapter,
which are defined by applicable state law, the Uniform Code or this code, are
used in this chapter as so defined, unless from the context it clearly appears
that a different meaning is intended.
      OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building, structure or property is
used or intended to be used.
      OCCUPANT. Any person who occupies a unit, building, structure or
property, whether as an owner, or tenant or permittee of the owner.
      OWNER. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in the property.
      PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, association or
organization, or the agent of any of the foregoing.
(Ord. MC-670, passed 7-19-1989; Ord. MC-671, passed 7-26-1989; Ord. MC-1027,
passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1372, passed 4-17-2012)
§ 15.20.030 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
   (A)   Buildings and structures. No relocated, or hereafter erected structure
shall be occupied, or no change in occupancy shall be inaugurated until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Department of Community
Development and Housing.
   (B)   Valid certificate. A certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate
of occupancy shall not be deemed to be valid if it has expired, been denied,
withheld, revoked, failed to pass a fire inspection or a new certificate of
occupancy was required but had not been obtained.
   (C)   Posting certificate. The owner of the business, building or structure
shall display this certificate in a conspicuous place. In addition, the owner
of a building or structure shall provide a copy of the certificate to all
lessees, renters and purchasers of the property.
(Ord. MC-670, passed 7-19-1989; Ord. MC-671, passed 7-26-1989; Ord. MC-781,
passed 4-22-1991; Ord. MC-782, passed 5-3-1991; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998;
Ord. MC-1373, passed 5-24-2012; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 15.20.040 CONDITIONS REQUIRING APPLICATION.
   A new certificate of occupancy shall be required whenever:
   (A)   A new building is constructed;
   (B)   A change in use affecting a building’s existing zoning approval or
conformity, or a change in the nature of use of a building which would place it
in a different occupancy classification, or division thereof;
   (C)   A building or structure has been vacant for more than 180 days;
   (D)   Whenever a building is ordered to be vacated by the Building Official
due to substandard or dangerous conditions; and
   (E)   Undeveloped or vacant property is to be used or occupied.
(Ord. MC-670, passed 7-19-1989; Ord. MC-671, passed 7-26-1989; Ord. MC-781,
passed 4-22-1991; Ord. MC-782, passed 5-3-1991; Ord. MC-880, passed 6-23-1993;
Ord. MC-1373, passed 5-24-2012)
§ 15.20.050 APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   The owner shall file a written application accompanied by payment of a
fee with the Department of Community Development and Housing prior to use or
occupancy of the premises or 30 days prior to expiration of an existing
certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy. The Building
Official shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises within ten
working days for compliance with city codes. If the premises are in compliance
with said codes, the Building Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   When an inspection discloses that the premises are not in compliance
with the codes, the Building Official shall give written notice of each
deficiency to the owner. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the
owner until all deficiencies are corrected. If the owner fails to correct all
said deficiencies within 60 days after the original application was filed, the
application shall expire and a new application, plus fees, will be required.
   (C)   The owner shall be responsible for making the premises available for
inspection by the city.
(Ord. MC-670, passed 7-19-1989; Ord. MC-671, passed 7-26-1989; Ord. MC-741,
passed 9-17-1990; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1373, passed 5-24-
2012; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 15.20.070 TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   If the Building Official finds that no substantial hazard will result
from use or occupancy of any building or portion thereof, any structure or any
vacant property, and upon a showing of good cause by the owner, the Building
Official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for up to 180 days.
   (B)   When a temporary certificate of occupancy is issued for more than 30
days, the Building Official shall require a cash bond payable to the city in an
amount equal to the cost of doing the required work as determined by the
Building Official.
(Ord. MC-670, passed 7-19-1989; Ord. MC-671, passed 7-26-1989; Ord. MC-1373,
passed 5-24-2012)
§ 15.20.080 REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   The Building Official, in writing, may deny or revoke a certificate of
occupancy when it is determined that the building, structure or property is in
violation of the codes, or when the certificate was issued in error or on false
information supplied by the applicant. The certificate of occupancy is
automatically revoked when there is a change of use or occupancy
classification, when the building or structure has been vacant for more than
180 days or when a building is ordered vacated by the Building Official due to
substandard or dangerous conditions.
(Ord. MC-670, passed 7-19-1989; Ord. MC-671, passed 7-26-1989; Ord. MC-880,
passed 6-23-1993; Ord. MC-1373, passed 5-24-2012)
§ 15.20.090 HEARINGS.
   Any person aggrieved by the revocation of any certificate of occupancy by
the Building Official may appeal that decision in the manner set forth in
Chapter 9.94, as such revocation is an administrative enforcement action. Any
person aggrieved by the denial of a certificate of occupancy may appeal that
decision in the manner set forth in
Chapter 2.45, as such denial is an order, decision or determination of the
Building Official relating to the building standards of the California Building
Standards Code.
(Ord. MC-670, passed 7-19-1989; Ord. MC-671, passed 7-26-1989; Ord. MC-1373,
passed 5-24-2012; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.20.100 CONNECTION/DISCONNECTION OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   Buildings, structures or property shall be issued a certificate of
occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy prior to connection of public
utilities. The Building Official may approve the connection of utilities prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy when requested, in writing, by
the applicant for good cause shown, and when he or she finds that no unsafe
conditions exist or will be created by such connection.
   (B)   The Building Official may disconnect or order discontinuance of any
utility service to any buildings, structures or premises lacking a valid
certificate of occupancy or a valid temporary certificate of occupancy pursuant
to the state codes.
(Ord. MC-670, passed 7-19-1989; Ord. MC-671, passed 7-26-1989; Ord. MC-880,
passed 6-23-1993; Ord. MC-1373, passed 5-24-2012)
§ 15.20.110 VIOLATION.
   Any person who violates or causes the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction
thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
(Ord. MC-670, passed 7-19-1989; Ord. MC-671, passed 7-26-1989; Ord. MC-1373,
passed 5-24-2012)
CHAPTER 15.24: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
15.24.010   Findings
   
15.24.020   Purpose
   
15.24.030   Definitions
   
15.24.040   Maintenance requirements for single-family residences, multi-
residential, commercial and industrial property
   
15.24.050   Enforcement - penalty
   
15.24.060   Severability
§ 15.24.010 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The citizens of the city have become increasingly concerned with the
unsightliness, the deterioration and the degradation of certain properties,
whether residential, commercial or any other zoning designation in their
neighborhoods and have sought the help of city government in their effort to
preserve their neighborhoods.
   (B)   Local governments have the authority to establish minimum requirements
for property maintenance to protect the health, safety and appearance of
neighborhoods. Enforcement of these minimum maintenance requirements can reduce
and eliminate blight and deterioration of neighborhoods, protecting both
property values and neighborhood integrity.
   (C)   The Mayor and City Council find that the deterioration of
neighborhoods by the failure to maintain properties to minimum standards
results in an adverse effect on the health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of this city.
(Ord. MC-679, passed 9-19-1989; Ord. MC-1292, passed 2-3-2009)
§ 15.24.020 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish and enforce minimum maintenance
standards for all property within the city in order to protect and preserve
neighborhood integrity.
(Ord. MC-679, passed 9-19-1989; Ord. MC-1292, passed 2-3-2009)
§ 15.24.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from context,
certain words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated. The definitions in this chapter are included for
reference purposes only and are not intended to narrow the scope of definitions
set forth in applicable laws or regulations. All terms used in this chapter,
which are not defined in this section, but are defined by applicable laws,
shall have the same meaning as the definition in the applicable law, unless
from context it clearly appears that a different meaning is intended.
   APPLICABLE LAWS. Any applicable state or federal law, any uniform or state
codes adopted by the municipal code, including, but not limited to, the
California Building Code, Uniform Housing Code, Uniform Code for the Abatement
of Dangerous Buildings and California Fire Code.
   GRAFFITI. Any inscription, word, figure, mark or design that is written,
marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on real property, buildings,
structures (permanent or temporary) or other fixtures thereon, or on any
personal property placed on such real property, including vehicles.
   INOPERABLE or ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle, operative or inoperative, that
is:
      (1)   Mechanically incapable of being driven;
      (2)   Prohibited from being operated on a public street or highway,
pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code, concerning license
plates, registration, equipment, safety and related matters;
      (3)   Has been left by the owner or responsible person for over 72 hours
and has indicia of being inoperable, including, but not limited to, flat or
deflated tires, cobwebs and accumulated dirt, trash or debris in and on the
vehicle; or
      (4)   Wrecked and/or dismantled.
   OWNER. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in the property.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, association or
organization, or the agent of any of the foregoing.
   PROPERTY. Any real property zoned for any of the uses set forth in the
Development Code and includes sidewalks and parkways adjacent to the property.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
      (1)   Means any vehicles towed or self-propelled on its own chassis or
attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or used for
recreational or sporting purposes or exclusively for hauling personal property.
      (2)   The term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE includes, but is not limited to,
motor homes, fifth-wheels, campers, camp trailers, trailers, boats, water craft
and all terrain vehicles.
   VISIBLE. Viewable from the public right-of-way, from property open to the
general public, common areas on a property or viewable from another property in
proximity to the property in question.
(Ord. MC-679, passed 9-19-1989; Ord. MC-1187, passed 10-5-2004; Ord. MC-1292,
passed 2-3-2009)
§ 15.24.040 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCES, MULTI-
RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY.
   Any person owning, renting, occupying, managing or otherwise having charge
of any single-family residence, multi-residential, commercial and industrial
property shall maintain the property in accordance with the following minimum
standards. Failure to comply with these minimum standards shall constitute a
violation of this code.
   (A)   Exterior requirements.
      (1)   Lack of landscaping. All required setbacks abutting a public right-
of-way and front and visible side yards shall be landscaped (except for
improved surfaces, including, but not limited to, walks and driveways) with
trees, shrubs, ground cover, decorative rock, redwood bark and/or grass.
      (2)   Unmaintained landscaping. Trees, shrubs, lawns and other planted
vegetation shall be maintained, including regular irrigation, pruning of trees,
trimming of shrubs and cutting of lawns.
      (3)   Weeds, dry brush and overgrown vegetation. Property shall be free
of overgrown or dead vegetation, including, but not limited to, weeds, trees or
limbs, bushes and other planted vegetation. Weeds include sage brush, dry
grass, chaparral and any other brush or vegetation which attains extensive
growth and becomes a fire menace when dry.
      (4)   Trash, debris and improper storage. Property shall be free of
trash, litter, debris, packing boxes, lumber, junk, salvage materials (except
where otherwise permitted by this code), broken or inoperative furniture,
appliances, machinery, equipment, any furniture (except for furniture
specifically designed for outdoor use), including, but not limited to,
furniture on porches, balconies, sun decks and in front yards, and any other
improperly stored personal property causing an unsightly appearance.
      (5)   Vehicle and recreational vehicle storage. All operable vehicles and
recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored in designated, screened areas,
a garage, carport or on an improved surface. None of the above shall be
occupied.
      (6)   Inoperable and abandoned vehicles. Property shall be free of
inoperable or abandoned vehicles and parts of vehicles unless they are safely
stored in a garage or other enclosed storage area. This section shall not apply
to a vehicle, or part thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on
private property in connection with the lawfully authorized and permitted
business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a licensed
junkyard; provided, however, that this exception shall not authorize the
maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined by applicable laws.
      (7)   Condition of structures. All improvements on the property,
including, but not limited to, buildings, garages, carports, porches, gates,
fences, doors, windows, roofs, gutters, signs, permanent or temporary
structures, stairs, handrails, retaining walls and trash enclosures shall be
painted/preserved and maintained in good repair and condition. Paint or
preservatives shall not be worn, peeling or cracking.
      (8)   Improved surfaces. Walkways on private property, driveways, parking
areas and all improved surfaces shall be maintained in good repair and safe
condition. Parking lot striping and handicap markings shall be maintained in
good condition.
      (9)   Graffiti. Buildings, structures, sidewalks, driveways, other
improved surfaces and any other personal property placed on real property,
including vehicles, shall be free of graffiti.
      (10)   Rodent and vermin control. Property shall be free from infestation
of termites, insects, vermin or rodents.
      (11)   Sewage. Improved property shall be properly connected to a sewage
disposal system or a sanitary sewer and free from sewage seepage.
      (12)   Pools and spas. Pools and spas shall be securely fenced and
adequately maintained in accordance with the Development Code and other
applicable laws.
      (13)   Construction. All buildings or structures in a state of partial
construction, repair or rehabilitation shall have an active/valid permit and
shall be completed during the term of an active/valid building permit or other
time frame ordered by the city. The owner or responsible person shall be
progressing diligently to complete the repair, construction or rehabilitation
of the building or structure.
      (14)   Fencing. All fencing shall be constructed in compliance with the
Development Code and other applicable laws with acceptable fencing materials
such as wood, vinyl, masonry or wrought iron.
   (B)   Interior requirements. The interiors of all buildings and structures
on the property, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be
maintained in good repair and safe, sanitary conditions in conformance with the
building code under which it was built or remodeled and any retroactive codes.
(Ord. MC-679, passed 9-19-1989; Ord. MC-1292, passed 2-3-2009)
§ 15.24.050 ENFORCEMENT - PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates or causes violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, which, upon conviction
thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City Attorney
from commencing a civil action to abate a nuisance in addition to,
alternatively to or in conjunction with the proceedings set forth in this
chapter; nor shall anything in this chapter be deemed to prevent the city from
commencing a criminal action with respect to the nuisance in addition to,
alternatively to or in conjunction with the proceedings set forth in this
chapter, or other ordinance, statute or state law.
   (C)   Payment of any fine or service of jail sentence herein provided shall
not relieve a person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity from the
responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation. In
addition to the above penalties, the court may order that the guilty party
reimburse the city for all costs of investigating, analyzing and prosecuting
the enforcement action against the guilty party. The court shall fix the amount
of any such reimbursement upon submission of proof of such costs by the city.
(Ord. MC-679, passed 9-19-1989; Ord. MC-1029, passed 9-22-1998; Ord. MC-1292,
passed 2-3-2009)
§ 15.24.060 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any sentence, section
or other part of this chapter should be found to be invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect the remaining provisions, and the remaining provisions shall
continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. MC-679, passed 9-19-1989; Ord. MC-1292, passed 2-3-2009)
CHAPTER 15.25: MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL HOUSING FIRE INSPECTION PROGRAM
Section
   
15.25.010   Purpose
   
15.25.020   Definitions
   
15.25.030   Scope
   
15.25.040   Annual inspection required
   
15.25.050   Administrative citations
   
15.25.080   Enforcement - public nuisance
   
15.25.090   Enforcement - alternatives
§ 15.25.010 PURPOSE.
   The multi-family rental housing fire inspection program is a part of the
city’s overall effort to encourage upkeep of multi-family rental housing units.
Owners of these types of structures will be required to maintain these units in
accordance with applicable housing, building and property maintenance standards
as adopted by the city. Recent fires in the city have resulted in property
damage, personal injuries and loss of life in multi-family rental housing
units. Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 13146.2(a) requires city fire departments
to inspect multi-family rental housing units annually.
(Ord. MC-930, passed 1-11-1995; Ord. MC-1176, passed 7-22-2004)
§ 15.25.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino.
   FIRE MARSHAL. The division head of the San Bernardino City Fire Department
Fire Prevention Division, or his or her designee.
   MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL HOUSING COMPLEX. A multi-unit residential structure
consisting of four or more units existing on one parcel of land.
   MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL HOUSING UNIT or UNIT. Any residential dwelling unit, as
defined in Chapter 19.02 of the Development Code, in a single structure, or in
a group of attached or detached structures containing two or more such dwelling
units on the same parcel of land, and is occupied or intended to be occupied on
a rental basis. For the purpose of this chapter, the following types of
dwelling units or facilities are not considered MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL HOUSING
UNITS:
      (1)   Hotels or motels;
      (2)   Accommodations in any hospital, extended care facility, residential
care facility, convalescent home, non-profit home for the aged or dormitory
that is owned and operated by an education institution; and
      (3)   Mobile home parks.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who occupies a unit, whether as an owner or tenant or
permittee of the owner.
   OWNER. A single individual or entity that has any kind of ownership
interest, whether as an individual, partner, joint venturer, stock owner or
some other capacity.
   PERSON. The individual, partnership, corporation or association or the
rental agent of any of the foregoing.
(Ord. MC-930, passed 1-11-1995; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1176,
passed 7-22-2004)
§ 15.25.030 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all multi-family rental
housing complexes containing four or more units on a single parcel.
(Ord. MC-930, passed 1-11-1995; Ord. MC-1176, passed 7-22-2004)
§ 15.25.040 ANNUAL INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 13146.2, any multi-family
rental housing complex, containing four or more units on a single parcel, shall
be subject to an annual inspection of the interior and exterior by the Fire
Marshal for compliance with applicable sections of state and local fire codes
relating to housing, building and property maintenance.
   (B)   The Fire Marshal shall mail written notice to the owner(s) of the
multi-family rental housing complex at least three weeks before the scheduled
annual inspection. The owner(s) of the multi-family rental housing complex
shall give written notice to all tenants at least one week before the scheduled
annual inspection.
   (C)   The owner(s) of the multi-family rental housing complex shall pay a
fee to the city, in an amount set by resolution of the City Council, sufficient
to pay the costs of the Fire Marshal’s annual inspection pursuant to this
chapter.
   (D)   Any owner(s) of a multi-family rental housing complex who fails to
permit the annual inspection by the Fire Marshal, pursuant to this chapter,
shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor punishable in accordance with
Chapter 1.12.
   (E)   Any owner(s) of a multi-family rental housing complex who fails to pay
the fee charged for the costs of the Fire Marshal’s annual inspection, pursuant
to this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction punishable in accordance with
Chapter 1.12.
(Ord. MC-1176, passed 7-22-2004)
§ 15.25.050 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS.
   Where the Fire Marshal’s annual inspection, pursuant to this chapter,
identifies a violation(s) of state or local Fire Codes, relating to housing,
building or property maintenance, the Fire Marshal may issue an administrative
citation to the property owner(s) in accordance with
Chapter 9.92.
(Ord. MC-1176, passed 7-22-2004)
§ 15.25.080 ENFORCEMENT - PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   It shall be considered a public nuisance to have or maintain any
rental property which fails to comply with state and local laws as they relate
to Fire Codes, housing standards, property maintenance, Building Codes or local
zoning requirements.
   (B)   The Fire Marshal shall have the power to require correction of
violations identified through the annual inspection by using the procedure set
forth in the California Fire Code, Title 24, Part 9, Part 1 (Chapters 1 and 2)
and
Chapter 8.30 of the municipal code.
(Ord. MC-930, passed 1-11-1995; Ord. MC-1176, passed 7-22-2004)
§ 15.25.090 ENFORCEMENT - ALTERNATIVES.
   (A)   Nothing herein shall prevent the enforcement of this chapter by
criminal, civil or administrative actions either undertaken individually or in
conjunction with other remedies.
   (B)   The enforcement of this chapter by a criminal, civil or administrative
action shall not relieve the property owner of his or her obligations under
this chapter.
(Ord. MC-930, passed 1-11-1995; Ord. MC-1176, passed 7-22-2004)
CHAPTER 15.26: SINGLE-FAMILY RENTAL PROPERTY INSPECTION PROGRAM
Section
   
15.26.010   Purpose
   
15.26.020   Applicability
   
15.26.030   Rebuttable presumption
   
15.26.040   Definitions
   
15.26.050   Compliance with business registration requirements
   
15.26.060   Biennial inspection required
   
15.26.070   Inspection fees
   
15.26.080   Notice of inspection
   
15.26.090   Violations
   
15.26.100   Re-inspections
   
15.26.110   Administrative citations
   
15.26.120   Appeals
   
15.26.130   Self-certification program
   
15.26.140   Complaint-based inspections
   
15.26.150   Voluntary inspection requests
   
15.26.160   Enforcement - public nuisance
   
15.26.170   Enforcement - alternatives
   
15.26.180   Penalties
§ 15.26.010 PURPOSE.
   The single-family rental property inspection program is a part of the city’s
overall effort to encourage upkeep of all rental property, as defined herein.
Owners of any rental property will be required to maintain these units in
accordance with all applicable laws.
§ 15.26.020 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all single-family rental
property, as that term is defined herein, within the city. This chapter also
applies to the premises on which a rental property is located, including, but
not limited to, parking lots, driveways, landscaping, accessory structures,
fences, walls, swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are supplementary and complementary to
other provisions of this code and applicable laws. Nothing in this chapter may
be construed to limit any existing right of the city to abate nuisances or to
enforce any provisions of applicable law, statute or this code, including
provisions of uniform codes adopted by reference in this code.
§ 15.26.030 REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1371, passed 3-20-2012)
§ 15.26.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from their
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated. The definitions in this chapter are included for
reference purposes only and are not intended to narrow the scope of definitions
set forth in federal or state laws or regulations. Words used in this chapter
in the singular may include the plural and the plural may include the singular.
Use of the masculine shall also mean feminine and neuter.
   APPLICABLE LAWS. The City’s Municipal Code, the California Fire Code, the
California Building Code, the Uniform Housing Code, Uniform Code for the
Abatement of Dangerous Building and any other laws or regulations relating to
the health or safety of city residents or the general public.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Community Development and Housing of the City of
San Bernardino, or his or her designee.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who occupies a rental property, whether as a tenant or
permittee of the owner.
   OWNER or PROPERTY OWNER. A single individual, partnership or joint venture
or any entity that has any kind of ownership interest in a rental property,
whether as an individual, partner, joint venture, stock owner or ownership
interest in some other capacity or the owner’s designee. If more than one
person or an entity owns the subject real property, OWNER or PROPERTY OWNER
refers to each person or entity holding any kind of ownership interest in the
property, and the property owners’ obligations in this chapter are joint and
several as to each property owner.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RENTAL PROPERTY, RENTAL PROPERTY or RENTAL UNIT. A dwelling
unit, as defined in Chapter 19.02 of the San Bernardino Development Code, in a
single structure, or in a group of attached or detached structures containing
three or less such dwelling units on the same parcel of land, and is occupied
or for occupancy by a person(s) other than the owner of the unit and includes
the premises on which said rental property is situated and any common areas,
including, but not limited to, parking lots, driveways, landscaping, accessory
structures, fences, walls, swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. For the purpose
of this chapter, the following types of dwelling units or facilities are not
considered SINGLE-FAMILY RENTAL HOUSING UNITS:
      (1)   Multi-family rental housing complexes, as defined in
Chapter 15.25;
      (2)   Hotels or motels;
      (3)   Condominiums, as defined in Chapter 19.02 of the Development Code,
that are used for residential dwellings. This exception only applies if the
condominium has a bona fide home owner’s association (“
      (4)   Accommodations in any hospital, extended care facility, residential
care facility, convalescent home, non-profit home for the aged or dormitory
that is owned and operated by an education institution; and
      (5)   Mobile home parks.
(Ord. MC-1371, passed 3-20-2012; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 15.26.050 COMPLIANCE WITH BUSINESS REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Every property owner subject to this chapter must comply with the business
registration requirements of Title 5.
(Ord. MC-1371, passed 3-20-2012)
§ 15.26.060 BIENNIAL INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   All rental property located in the city shall be subject to an annual
inspection by the Director for compliance with applicable laws.
§ 15.26.070 INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   Any fees established by this chapter shall be set by separate
resolution of the City Council and may be adjusted, from time to time, by the
City Council to ensure that the fee adequately finances the costs of
inspections and enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   The owner of a rental property shall pay an annual inspection fee to
the city sufficient to pay the costs of the Director’s annual inspection
pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   Owners qualified for the self-certification program shall pay the
annual inspection fee the first year of participation and thereafter shall not
be required to pay the annual inspection fee for the second and third year of
participation in the program. If an owner is removed from the self-
certification program, he or she shall become subject to annual inspections and
annual inspection fees.
§ 15.26.080 NOTICE OF INSPECTION.
   The Director shall mail written notice of the date and time of the
inspection to the owner of the rental property at least three weeks before the
scheduled annual inspection. Such notice shall provide the address and phone
number where additional information concerning the inspection may be obtained.
Notice to the owner shall be mailed by certified mail to the owner’s last known
address as it appears in the records of the County Assessor’s office.
§ 15.26.090 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever the Director determines that a violation of this chapter
exists, the Director shall give notice of violation and an order to correct to
the property owner. The notice shall be in writing and shall describe with
reasonable detail the violation(s) so that the property owner has the
opportunity to correct said violation.
   (B)   Any person who fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter
after receiving written notice of the violations(s) and being given a
reasonable opportunity to correct such violations(s) shall be deemed to be in
violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Any owner of a rental property, who fails to permit the annual
inspection by the Director pursuant to this chapter, shall be in violation of
this chapter.
   (D)   Any owner of a rental property who fails to pay any applicable fee(s)
established to cover the city’s costs pursuant to this chapter shall be in
violation of this chapter.
§ 15.26.100 RE-INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   One or more re-inspections will be conducted to verify that the
deficiencies noted by the Director during the annual inspection have been
corrected.
   (B)   Violations that were not noted on the initial inspection report, but
are discovered on the re-inspection due to subsequent damage or deterioration,
shall be subject to correction.
§ 15.26.110 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS.
   (A)   Owners who fail to correct any deficiencies noted during any
inspection or re-inspection may be subject to an administrative citation in
accordance with
Chapter 9.92 until all deficiencies have been corrected to the satisfaction of
the Director.
   (B)   Issuance of an administrative citation is in addition to any other
administrative or judicial (civil or criminal) remedy established by law which
may be pursued to address any violation of the municipal code.
§ 15.26.120 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest the citation
by the procedures set forth in §
9.92.080.
   (B)   Any party to an administrative citation hearing may appeal from an
adverse ruling to the Board of Building Commissioners as set forth in §
9.92.180.
§ 15.26.130 SELF-CERTIFICATION PROGRAM.
   (A)   Well-maintained rental property with no outstanding violations of any
applicable laws may qualify to participate in the self-certification program.
Qualifying properties will not be subject to inspections for a period of three
years; provided that conditions of the rental property do not deteriorate
during that time to the point where the rental property would no longer meet
eligibility standards for the self-certification program.
   (B)   To qualify for the self-certification program, a property owner must:
      (1)   Complete the self-certification program application packet provided
by the city;
      (2)   Pay the annual inspection fee and any other fees required by
applicable laws; and
      (3)   Conduct a self-inspection of all exterior and site conditions of
all rental property, and certify that conditions at the rental property meet
the exterior standards listed on the self-certification program’s checklist.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a request from a property owner to participate in the
self-certification program and payment of the appropriate fee(s), the city may
inspect the rental property. If the Director determines that the property is
qualified to participate in the self-certification program, a certificate of
compliance will be issued and the property owner will not be required to pay
the annual inspection fee for the second and third years. Recertification in
the self-certification program and payment of the annual inspection fee shall
be required every three years.
   (D)   If the Director determines that the property is not eligible to
participate in the self-certification program, then the residential rental
property shall be subject to inspection and the property owner shall be
assessed the annual inspection fee as well as any other applicable fees.
   (E)   At all times, the city shall retain the authority to investigate and
address any violation of applicable laws.
   (F)   Any owner that fails to maintain a rental property to meet all of the
standards listed on the self-certification program’s checklist shall
immediately be removed from the self-certification program and become subject
to annual inspections.
   (G)   If an officer determines that a property qualifies for self-
certification upon inspecting the property in accordance with this chapter, the
property shall be automatically enrolled in the self-certification program.
(Ord. MC-1371, passed 3-20-2012)
§ 15.26.140 COMPLAINT-BASED INSPECTIONS.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city’s
authority to inspect any rental property in response to a complaint alleging
code violations or violations of applicable laws and to pursue all remedies
permissible under this code or applicable laws.
§ 15.26.150 VOLUNTARY INSPECTION REQUESTS.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit a property
owner or occupant from voluntarily requesting an inspection pursuant to this
chapter to determine whether the rental property complies with applicable laws.
§ 15.26.160 ENFORCEMENT - PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   It shall be considered a public nuisance to have or maintain any rental
properties that fail to comply with any applicable laws. The Director shall
have the power to require correction of violations identified through the
annual inspection by using the procedure set forth in
Chapter 8.30.
§ 15.26.170 ENFORCEMENT - ALTERNATIVES.
   Nothing herein shall prevent the enforcement of this chapter by criminal,
civil or administrative actions either undertaken individually or in
conjunction with other remedies. The enforcement of this chapter by a criminal,
civil or administrative action shall not relieve the property owner of his or
her obligations under this chapter.
§ 15.26.180 PENALTIES.
   (A)   A violation of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor and may
be punished as such, however, at the discretion of the City Attorney, the
violation of any provisions of this article may be filed as an infraction. The
complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the violation is a
misdemeanor or an infraction, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in
accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
   (B)   Any fees established pursuant to this section, which are more than 30
days delinquent, shall constitute an assessment against the rental property for
the inspection of which the fees were billed. Such delinquent fees shall be a
lien on the rental property. The Director shall notify the property owner of
the affected rental property not less than 30 days prior to notifying the
county that a lien will be placed on the property, and shall state the amount
then owed. If full payment is not received within 30 days after said notice,
the Director shall take whatever action is required for the amount due to be
included in the next property tax bill assessment for the rental property.
   (C)   In the event that any provision of this chapter, or any part thereof,
or any application thereof, to any person or circumstance, is for any reason
held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by a court of
competent jurisdiction on its face or as applied, such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter, or any part thereof,
or any application thereof to any person or circumstance or of said provision
as applied to any other person or circumstance. It is declared to be the
legislative intent of the city that this chapter would have been adopted had
such unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective provision not been included
herein.
(Ord. MC-1266, passed 4-8-2008)
CHAPTER 15.27: MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL HOUSING PROGRAM MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
Section
   
15.27.010   Purpose
   
15.27.020   Applicability
   
15.27.030   Definitions
   
15.27.040   Scope
   
15.27.050   Mandatory participation
   
15.27.060   Notice of inspection
   
15.27.070   Violations
   
15.27.080   Re-inspections
   
15.27.090   Administrative citations
   
15.27.100   Appeals
   
15.27.110   Severability
§ 15.27.010 PURPOSE.
   The multi-family rental housing maintenance program is part of the city’s
overall effort to maintain high property standards for maintenance of multi-
family rental properties, as defined herein. Owners of any multi-family rental
property will be required to maintain these units in accordance with all
applicable laws.
(Ord. MC-1619, passed 10-4-2023)
§ 15.27.020 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all multi-family rental
property, as that term is defined herein, within the city. This chapter also
applies to the premises on which a multi-family rental property is located,
including, but not limited to, parking lots, driveways, landscaping, accessory
structures, fences and walls.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are supplementary and complementary to
other provisions of this code and applicable laws. Nothing in this chapter may
be construed to limit any existing right of the city to abate nuisances or to
enforce any provisions of applicable law, statute or this code, including
provisions of uniform codes adopted by reference in this code.
(Ord. MC-1619, passed 10-4-2023)
§ 15.27.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from their
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated. The definitions in this chapter are included for
reference purposes only and are not intended to narrow the scope of definitions
set forth in federal or state laws or regulations. Words used in this chapter
in the singular may include the plural and the plural may include the singular.
Use of the masculine shall also mean feminine and neuter.
   APPLICABLE LAWS. The City’s Municipal Code, the California Fire Code, the
California Building Code, the Uniform Housing Code, Uniform Code for the
Abatement of Dangerous Building and any other laws or regulations relating to
the health or safety of city residents or the general public, as adopted by the
city.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Community, Housing and Economic Development of the
City of San Bernardino, or his or her designee.
   MANAGER. The person(s) who is responsible for the day-to-day maintenance,
upkeep and security of the rental property. MANAGER does not mean those who
only physically perform the day-to-day maintenance, upkeep and security
functions of the rental property, such as, but not limited to, groundskeepers,
craft workers and security guards. Rather, the MANAGER is the person(s) who
makes the decisions concerning, and who directs and controls those who execute,
the day-to-day maintenance, upkeep and security of the rental property.
   MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL HOUSING COMPLEX. A multi-unit residential structure
consisting of four or more units existing on one parcel of land.
   MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL HOUSING UNIT or UNIT. Any residential dwelling unit, as
defined in Chapter 19.02 of the Development Code, in a single structure, or in
a group of attached or detached structures containing two or more such dwelling
units on the same parcel of land, and is occupied or intended to be occupied on
a rental basis. For the purpose of this chapter, the following types of
dwelling units or facilities are not considered MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL HOUSING
UNITS:
      (1)   Hotels or motels;
      (2)   Accommodations in any hospital, extended care facility, residential
care facility, convalescent home, non-profit home for the aged or dormitory
that is owned and operated by an education institution; and
      (3)   Mobile home parks.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who occupies a multi-family rental property, whether as
a tenant or permittee of the owner.
   OWNER or PROPERTY OWNER. A single individual, partnership or joint venture
or any entity that has any kind of ownership interest in a multi-family rental
property whether as an individual, partner, joint venture, stock owner or
ownership interest in some other capacity or the owner’s designee. If more than
one person or an entity owns the subject real property, OWNER or PROPERTY OWNER
refers to each person or entity holding any kind of ownership interest in the
property, and the property owners’ obligations in this chapter are joint and
several as to each property owner.
(Ord. MC-1619, passed 10-4-2023; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 15.27.040 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all multi-family rental
housing complexes containing four or more units on a single parcel.
(Ord. MC-1619, passed 10-4-2023)
§ 15.27.050 MANDATORY PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   All multi-family rental property located in the city shall be subject
to an annual inspection by the Director for compliance with the multi-family
rental housing program maintenance standards.
   (B)   All property owners and managers of multi-family rental property shall
attend the eight-hour rental housing course presented by the city within eight
months of the passage of this chapter. If a new owner or manager takes over the
property, the new property owner or manager shall complete the eight-hour
rental housing course presented by the city within six months of said ownership
or employment.
   (C)   Any oral or written communication in the form of educational manuals,
guidance, inspection materials, memoranda, reports, worksheets and writings
used by the city and its employees and/or agents used in the rental housing
course and/or annual inspection shall refrain from referring to the multi-
family rental housing program maintenance standards as a crime-free program or
crime reduction program. The course and inspection materials shall refrain from
pejoratively or derogatorily describing persons with criminal histories. The
course and inspection materials shall not instruct property owners and managers
to rely upon or use any criminal history information in housing admissions and
housing termination of housing decisions that is prohibited by fair housing
state and federal laws and regulations, including guidance from applicable
state and federal enforcement agencies, which may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   City sworn law enforcement shall not be involved in conducting the
rental housing course or in conducting the annual exterior inspections or re-
inspections. City code enforcement officers may be involved in conducting the
rental housing course and in conducting the annual exterior inspections and re-
inspections as a lawful exercise of their duties, including, but not limited
to, enforcement responsibilities under Cal. Civil Code, §§ 1941 et seq. and
Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§ 17920.3 and 17975 et seq.
(Ord. MC-1619, passed 10-4-2023)
§ 15.27.060 NOTICE OF INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Director shall mail written notice of the date and time of the
inspection to the owner of the multi-family rental property at least three
weeks before the scheduled annual inspection. Such notice shall provide the
address and phone number where additional information concerning the inspection
may be obtained. Notice to the owner shall be mailed by regular mail to the
owner’s last known address as it appears in the records of the County
Assessor’s office.
   (B)   The notice of inspection for the rental housing maintenance program
shall be combined with the multi-family rental housing program notice to the
greatest extent possible for the convenience of the property owner.
(Ord. MC-1619, passed 10-4-2023)
§ 15.27.070 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever the Director determines that a violation of this chapter
exists, the Director shall give notice of violation and an order to correct to
the property owner. The notice shall be in writing and shall describe with
reasonable detail the violation(s) so that the property owner has the
opportunity to correct said violation(s).
   (B)   Any person who fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter
after receiving written notice of the violation(s) and being given a reasonable
opportunity to correct such violation(s) shall be deemed to be in violation of
this chapter.
   (C)   Any owner of a multi-family rental property who fails to permit the
annual inspection by the Director pursuant to this chapter shall be in
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1619, passed 10-4-2023)
§ 15.27.080 RE-INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   One or more re-inspections may be conducted to verify that the
deficiencies noted by the Director during the annual inspection have been
corrected.
   (B)   Violations that were not noted on the initial inspection report, but
are discovered on the re-inspection due to subsequent damage or deterioration
shall be subject to correction.
(Ord. MC-1619, passed 10-4-2023)
§ 15.27.090 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS.
   (A)   Owners who fail to correct any deficiencies noted during any
inspection or re-inspection may be subject to an administrative citation in
accordance with
Chapter 9.92 until all deficiencies have been corrected to the satisfaction of
the Director.
   (B)   Issuance of an administrative citation is in addition to any other
administrative or judicial (civil or criminal) remedy established by law which
may be pursued to address any violation of the municipal code.
(Ord. MC-1619, passed 10-4-2023)
§ 15.27.100 APPEALS.
   Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest the citation by the
procedures set forth in
Chapter 9.94.
(Ord. MC-1619, passed 10-4-2023)
§ 15.27.110 SEVERABILITY.
   In the event that any provision of this chapter, or any part thereof, or any
application thereof to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by a court of competent
jurisdiction on its face or as applied, such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter, or any part thereof, or
any application thereof to any person or circumstance or of said provision as
applied to any other person or circumstance. It is declared to be the
legislative intent of the city that this chapter would have been adopted had
such unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective provision not been included
herein.
(Ord. MC-1619, passed 10-4-2023)
CHAPTER 15.28: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Section
   
15.28.010   Referenced code
   
15.28.020   Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings - amended
   
15.28.030   Reserved
   
15.28.040   Reserved
   
15.28.050   Reserved
   
15.28.060   Reserved
   
15.28.070   Reserved
   
15.28.080   Reserved
   
15.28.090   Reserved
   
15.28.100   Reserved
   
15.28.110   Reserved
   
15.28.120   Reserved
   
15.28.130   Reserved
   
15.28.140   Securing dangerous buildings from entry
   
15.28.150   Abatement of nuisance by Building Official
   
15.28.160   Discontinuance of utilities
   
15.28.170   Filing of notice of pendency of administrative proceedings
   
15.28.180   Reserved
   
15.28.190   Post-disaster safety assessment placards
   
15.28.200   Section 103 amended
   
15.28.210   Section 205 amended
   
15.28.220   Section 301 amended
§ 15.28.010 REFERENCED CODE.
   The latest edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous
Buildings, as adopted pursuant to §
15.04.020, is incorporated herein, and as hereinafter amended, shall govern the
identification and abatement of dangerous buildings.
(Ord. 2291, passed 3-29-1960; Ord. 3481, passed 3-12-1975; Ord. MC-880, passed
6-23-1993)
§ 15.28.020 UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS - AMENDED.
   (A)   Chapters 5, 6 and 9 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous
Buildings are deleted.
   (B)   Procedures for appeals, hearings, enforcement of orders and abatements
related to the administrative enforcement procedures in the UCADB shall be in
accordance with
Chapter 8.30. Except for vacation orders made under § 404 of the UCADB,
enforcement of any notice and order of the Building Official is stayed during
the pendency of an appeal therefrom that is properly and timely filed.
(Ord. 2291, passed 3-29-1960; Ord. 3481, passed 3-12-1975; Ord. MC-880, passed
6-23-1993; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.28.030 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 15.28.040 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 15.28.050 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 15.28.060 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 15.28.070 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 15.28.080 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 15.28.090 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 15.28.100 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 15.28.110 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 15.28.120 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 15.28.130 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 15.28.140 SECURING DANGEROUS BUILDINGS FROM ENTRY.
   (A)   The Building Official is authorized to secure from entry any structure
that is ordered vacated in accordance with Chapter 4 of the Uniform Code for
the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings and where the Building Official
determines, in his or her sole discretion, that securing the structure is
necessary to enforce the order to vacate. The Enforcement Official may secure
such structures using any method deemed appropriate under the circumstances in
his or her discretion.
   (B)   It is unlawful to remove a notice to vacate posted in accordance with
Chapter 4 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous. Any person who
removes a notice to vacate without the express written consent of the City
Building Official is guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction thereof,
is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
   (C)   The Building Official’s decision to secure a structure may be appealed
in the same manner as the issuance of the underling notice to vacate and as
provided in §
15.28.020.
(Ord. 2291, passed 3-29-1960; Ord. 3227, passed 1-4-1972; Ord. MC-177, passed
7-7-1982; Ord. MC-228, passed 12-7-1982; Ord. MC-607, passed 9-22-1987; Ord.
MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.28.150 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   The same procedures provided in §
15.28.140 for abating nuisances through securing from entry any structure which
is determined by the Building Official to be immediately dangerous or hazardous
may be used by the Building Official in connection with the summary abatement
of all other nuisances upon private property which the Building Official
determines, in his or her discretion, to constitute an immediately dangerous or
hazardous condition in accordance with California Building Code, § 116.
   (B)   The Building Official, or his or her representative, may summarily
abate conditions found to be a nuisance under division (A) above, in his or her
discretion, in the most appropriate manner under the circumstances.
      (1)   The manner of abatement may include, but is not limited to, the
following methods: fencing, draining water from swimming pools and filling with
appropriate ballast, removing the fire hazards, filling or covering open holes
and grading or strengthening landfills or excavations.
      (2)   Although the manner and method used by the Building Official shall
be at his or her discretion, he or she shall, in making his determinations,
seek the most economical method and endeavor not to place an undue economic
hardship upon the owners of the property, using only those measures which will
eliminate the dangerous and hazardous conditions.
   (C)   (1)   The Building Official shall immediately after such abatement
action mail notice to the owners as provided in §
15.28.140.
      (2)   The notice shall include:
         (a)   A description of the action he or she has taken;
         (b)   The cost thereby incurred by the city, including all
administrative costs;
         (c)   The reasons why he or she has taken the action;
         (d)   That an appeal may be taken within ten days to the Board of
Building Commissioners as provided in §
15.28.140; and
         (e)   That if this action is not annulled by the Board of Building
Commissioners, the cost of abating the nuisance on the property shall become a
special assessment and lien on the property unless the cost is paid to the city
within 30 days of the mailing of the notice.
   (D)   Fees for processing demands for information regarding liens imposed
under this chapter shall apply in an amount set by resolution of the Mayor and
City Council.
   (E)   The procedures hereunder for appeal, hearing and any other actions
shall be as provided in
Chapter 3.68* for determination and collection of the assessment for costs of
abatement.
(Ord. 2291, passed 3-29-1960; Ord. 3227, passed 1-4-1972; Ord. 3593, passed 8-
2-1976; Ord. MC-177, passed 7-7-1982; Ord. MC-1307, passed 6-2-2009; Ord. MC-
1521, passed 9-18-2019; Ord. MC-1525, passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed
10-2-2024)
§ 15.28.160 DISCONTINUANCE OF UTILITIES.
   The Building Official may order the discontinuance or disconnection of
utilities for unsafe conditions as allowed by the California Building Code.
(Ord. 2291, passed 3-29-1960; Ord. 3227, passed 1-4-1972; Ord. MC-1525, passed
1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.28.170 FILING OF NOTICE OF PENDENCY OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS.
   At any time after the Building Official has initiated action to locate and
serve the owners with the notice and order referred to in § 401 of the Uniform
Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, the Building Official or the
City Engineer may file with the County Recorder a notice of pendency of
administrative proceedings which shall constitute notice to any subsequent
owner, purchaser, encumbrancer of the property described therein or involved in
the proceedings, beneficiary of a trust deed, lienholder, mortgagee or any
other person holding or claiming any interest of any kind in the property
described therein who shall be bound by the administrative proceedings,
including liability for all amounts and costs and expenses assessed against the
property as a lien for abatement in the same manner as if he or she had been
the owner at the time of commencement of the proceedings and had been properly
served at that time.
(Ord. 2291, passed 3-29-1960; Ord. 3227, passed 1-4-1972; Ord. MC-580, passed
2-4-1987; Ord. MC-880, passed 6-23-1993; Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.28.180 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
§ 15.28.190 POST-DISASTER SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS.
   (A)   Intent. This section establishes standard placards to be used to
indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy after any natural
or human-made disaster. The chapter further authorizes the Planning and
Building Services Department, as well as authorized representatives or
designees of that Department, to post the appropriate placard at each entry
point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment.
   (B)   Application of provisions. The provisions of this section are
applicable, following each natural or human-made disaster, to all buildings and
structures of all occupancies regulated by the city. The Mayor and City Council
may extend the provisions, as necessary.
   (C)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      SAFETY ASSESSMENT. A visual, non-destructive examination of a building or
structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy
following a natural or human-made disaster.
   (D)   Placards.
      (1)   The following are verbal descriptions of the official jurisdiction
placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of
buildings or structures.
         (a)   INSPECTED: Lawful occupancy permitted is to be posted on any
building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found.
This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or
structure.
         (b)   RESTRICTED USE is to be posted on each building or structure
that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of
restriction to the continued occupancy. The evaluator who posts this placard
will note, in general terms, the type of damage encountered and will clearly
and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy.
         (c)   UNSAFE: “Do Not Enter or Occupy” is to be posted on each
building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses
a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall
not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the
department that posted the building. Safety assessment teams shall be
authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard will note in
general terms the type of damage encountered.
      (2)   Each placard shall include the ordinance number, the name of the
Department, its address and phone number and a statement regarding the manner
in which an appeal may be filed.
      (3)   Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard
shall not be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized
representative of the Department or upon written notification from the
Department.
      (4)   Any person removing such placard without the express written
consent of the City Building Official is guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon
conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
   (E)   Notification.
      (1)   The Building Official shall, as soon as practicable but no later
than 30 days from the date of posting, mail a notice to the owner of each
building posted as “Restricted Use or Unsafe.” Such notice shall be mailed to
the owner(s) of record of the property as ascertained from the latest
assessment roll of the County Assessor.
      (2)   The notice shall include the following information:
         (a)   A statement indicating that the structure has suffered disaster
related damage which constitutes a hazard to its occupants, the public or
adjacent property;
         (b)   That the building has been posted with placards in accordance
with this section;
         (c)   The restrictions placed on the use or occupancy of the building;
         (d)   A brief description of the damage;
         (e)   That the damage must be repaired and the hazards eliminated
prior to re-occupancy; and
         (f)   That an appeal may be filed in accordance with the procedures
contained in this chapter.
   (F)   Abatements. If a damaged structure becomes a public nuisance due to
abandonment or the failure to repair damage which poses a hazard to the
occupants, the public or adjacent property, the Building Official may initiate
abatement proceedings in accordance with
Chapters 8.30 and this chapter.
(Ord. MC-1018, passed 2-4-1998)
§ 15.28.200 SECTION 103 AMENDED.
   Section 301 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is
amended to read as follows:
“All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under the
provisions of this code shall be subject to the provisions of the California
Building Standards Code promulgated by the California Building Standards
Commission in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, as adopted and
amended by the City of San Bernardino.”
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.28.210 SECTION 205 AMENDED.
   Section 205 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is
amended by deleting the section.
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
§ 15.28.220 SECTION 301 AMENDED.
   Section 301 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is
amended to read as follows:
“For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words, and their
derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this chapter or as
specified in the International Building Code. Where terms are not defined, they
shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they
are used. Words used in the singular include the plural and plural the
singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the
feminine the masculine.
BUILDING CODE is the California Building Code, as adopted and amended by the
City of San Bernardino.
DANGEROUS BUILDING is any building or structure deemed to be dangerous under
the provisions of
Section 302 of this code.”
(Ord. MC-1521, passed 9-18-2019)
CHAPTER 15.32: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-781, passed 4-22-1991)
CHAPTER 15.34: REMOVAL OR DESTRUCTION OF TREES
Section
   
15.34.010   Findings
   
15.34.020   Permit required
   
15.34.030   Exceptions
   
15.34.040   Application procedure
   
15.34.050   Inspection fee
   
15.34.060   Violation
§ 15.34.010 FINDINGS.
   Public safety and welfare and the protection of the environment requires
that certain regulations be adopted pertaining to the removal of trees within
the city.
(Ord. MC-682, passed 11-9-1989)
§ 15.34.020 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership or
association, either as owner, agent or otherwise, to cut down, uproot, destroy
and/or remove more than five trees within any 36-month period from a
development site or parcel of property without first being issued a permit from
the City Development Services Department.
(Ord. MC-682, passed 11-9-1989; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1989)
§ 15.34.030 EXCEPTIONS.
   A permit shall not be required when a lawful order to remove the trees for
health and safety purposes has been issued by a local, state or federal
government agency, nor shall a permit be required if a removal is to be
accomplished by, or under the auspices of a governmental entity or employee(s)
thereof. Commercial tree farms are also excepted from this chapter.
(Ord. MC-682, passed 11-9-1989)
§ 15.34.040 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The owner of the property, or his or her agent, shall file a written
application with the Planning Official prior to the destruction or removal of
the trees. The Planning Official shall cause an inspection to be made of the
property within ten working days to determine whether the trees can be removed.
If it is determined that the trees can be removed without detriment to the
environment and welfare of the community, then the Planning Official shall
issue the permit. Such permit may be issued subject to reasonable conditions
imposed by the Planning Official.
   (B)   When an inspection discloses that the removal of trees would be
detrimental to the environment and harmful to the safety and welfare of the
community, the Planning Official shall deny the issuance of a permit.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit by the Planning
Official may appeal the decision to the Mayor and City Council in accordance
with the provisions of
Chapter 2.64.
(Ord. MC-682, passed 11-9-1989)
§ 15.34.050 INSPECTION FEE.
   Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by an inspection fee
which shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-682, passed 11-9-1989)
§ 15.34.060 VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any person who violates, or causes violation of, any provision of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor, which, upon
conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with the provisions of §
1.12.010.
   (B)   Any person who violates or causes violation of any provision of this
chapter, in addition to the above fine, shall pay restitution to the city for
unlawful destruction or removal of the trees in an amount not to exceed the
replacement value of the trees.
(Ord. MC-682, passed 11-9-1989)
CHAPTER 15.36: DEMOLITION AND MOVING OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Section
   
15.36.010   Permit required - application
   
15.36.020   Reserved
§ 15.36.010 PERMIT REQUIRED - APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to demolish, dismantle or
tear down any house, building or structure within the city or to move the same
outside the city limits shall, before proceeding with such work, file an
application with the Department of Community and Economic Development for
permit to do so. The Superintendent, if he or she feels that the granting of
such permit is not contrary to public health, safety and welfare, and if he or
she determines that the applicant has fully complied with and satisfied each
and every other applicable provision of local and state law, shall issue such
permit; provided, however, that as a condition to the issuance of such permit,
the applicant shall pay to the Superintendent a fee in a sum in accordance with
the schedule set forth in § 303 of the California Building Code, which shall be
in addition to any other fee required by law, and shall deposit with him or her
a surety bond in the amount of $1,000 to ensure the faithful performance by the
applicant of the following conditions under which such permit is granted,
namely: that upon the moving, demolition, dismantling or tearing down of such
house, building or other structure, the lot, parcel or site shall be cleared of
all debris, brick, rock, cement work, foundations, weeds, brush, dead or
uncared for trees and vegetation and be filled and graded in accordance with
the provisions of
Chapter 15.04 in such a manner that storm waters and other waters will not
accumulate thereon so that the premises are left in a clean and safe condition
as determined by the Director of Community Development and Housing Department.
   (B)   Any permit issued under this section shall be further conditioned upon
completion of the work of moving or demolition, dismantling, tearing down,
filling, grading and cleaning of the site within a period of 90 days from the
date of its issuance, which period may be extended by the Building Official
upon good cause shown for such additional periods as may be reasonably required
to carry out the purposes of the permit.
   (C)   The permit shall not be issued or approved unless and until the
applicant has furnished satisfactory evidence to the Superintendent:
      (1)   That he or she has fully complied with the provisions of § 119(a)
of the Uniform Plumbing Code or other law pertaining to the plugging or capping
of abandoned sewer outlets;
      (2)   That he or she has obtained a permit for such plugging and capping
in accordance with § 1.8 of the Uniform Plumbing Code or other law;
      (3)   That he or she has completed the plugging and capping thereof in an
approved manner as evidenced by a final inspection; and
      (4)   That he or she has cleaned and filled any abandoned cesspool and
has filled and graded the property as required herein.
(Ord. 2014, passed 1-19-1954; Ord. 2784, passed 11-29-1966; Ord. 3628, passed
2-24-1977; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1525, passed 1-15-2020; Ord.
MC-1643, passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.36.020 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 15.37: HISTORIC BUILDING DEMOLITION ORDINANCE
Section
   
15.37.010   Findings and purpose
   
15.37.020   Definitions
   
15.37.030   Demolition prohibited
   
15.37.040   Dangerous buildings exempted under exigent circumstances
   
15.37.045   Evaluation thresholds and review requirements
   
15.37.050   Historic resource evaluation report
   
15.37.055   Criteria for determination of historical significance
   
15.37.060   Review process
   
15.37.070   Appeals
   
15.37.080   Penalty
   
15.37.085   Reserved
   
15.37.090   Fees
§ 15.37.010 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The Mayor and City Council find and declare the following.
   (A)   The city’s general plan, adopted on November 1, 2005, includes a
Historical and Archaeological Resources Element which provides a basis for
historic preservation in the city.
   (B)   This chapter is adopted to establish a procedure for consideration of
demolition requests for historic buildings and structures as defined herein.
(Ord. MC-694, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. MC-850, passed 9-9-1992; Ord. MC-1306,
passed 6-2-2009; Ord. MC-1482, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 15.37.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof and walls built and maintained to
shelter human activity or property.
   DEMOLITION. To destroy any building or structure so that it is no longer
standing or functional.
   REPORT. Historic resource evaluation report, a report that evaluates the
historical significance of a resource based upon established criteria.
   RESOURCE. A building or structure as defined in this chapter.
   STRUCTURE.
      (1)   Any structure having a roof and walls built and maintained to
shelter human activity or property; or
      (2)   A work made up of independent and interrelated parts that performs
a primary function unrelated to human shelter.
   SURVEY. Historic Resources Reconnaissance Survey (Volumes 1 through 5 and
Attachments, April 30, 1991 and all subsequent revisions), a citywide survey of
buildings and structures constructed prior to December 31, 1941, which provides
baseline information regarding the types and locations of resources,
approximate construction dates, representative architectural styles,
construction materials and contextual historical themes.
   THE ARTS AND HISTORICAL PRESERVATION COMMISSION. A commission formed by
resolution of the Mayor and City Council whose members are appointed by the
Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-694, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. MC-850, passed 9-9-1992; Ord. MC-1306,
passed 6-2-2009; Ord. MC-1482, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 15.37.030 DEMOLITION PROHIBITED.
   No building or structure 50 years old or older shall be demolished unless a
valid demolition permit has been issued in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. MC-694, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. MC-850, passed 9-9-1992; Ord. MC-1306,
passed 6-2-2009; Ord. MC-1482, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 15.37.040 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS EXEMPTED UNDER EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCES.
   The demolition of any building or structure 50 years old or older shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter if a determination has been made,
supported by findings of fact, by the hearing officer or the building official,
pursuant to
Chapter 15.28, declaring that the building or structure is a dangerous building
and constitutes an imminent threat to the health and safety of the public. In
lieu of immediate demolition of a structure posing an imminent hazard, feasible
mitigation measures should be employed where practicable in order to preserve
the structure and site until the historical review process is completed.
(Ord. MC-694, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. MC-850, passed 9-9-1992; Ord. MC-1306,
passed 6-2-2009; Ord. MC-1482, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 15.37.045 EVALUATION THRESHOLDS AND REVIEW REQUIREMENTS.
   Buildings and structures 50 years old or older proposed for demolition shall
be evaluated to determine historical significance. The level of review required
shall be determined in accordance with the following thresholds and
requirements which are based upon the Historic Resources Reconnaissance Survey
(Volumes 1 through 5 and attachments, April 30, 1991 and all subsequent
revisions).
   (A)   A historic resource evaluation report (“report”) shall be required for
any resource identified on a modified State Department of Parks and Recreation
(“DPR”) 523 Form (Volume 3, Appendix B, Resource List and DPR Forms) or located
within an area identified as being potentially eligible for Historic District
designation and listed as a contributing resource (Volume 3, Appendix C,
Historic Districts and Overlay Zones, Items 1 through 4).
   (B)   A historic resource evaluation report may be required for any resource
listed on the tabular list and located within the boundaries of an area
identified in the survey as being potentially eligible for Historic Overlay
Zone designation (Volume 3, Appendix C, Historic Districts and Overlay Zones,
Items 5 through 13). Using the criteria established in §
15.37.055, the Director of Community Development and Housing shall evaluate
demolition proposals for these resources to determine the requirement for a
report.
   (C)   Demolition permit applications for buildings and structures which are
listed only on the tabular list or not included in the survey shall not require
a report unless the Director of Community Development and Housing determines
that a report is required based upon new historical or cultural information not
contained in the survey. When required, historic resource evaluation reports
shall be prepared in accordance with §
15.37.050.
(Ord. MC-694, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. MC-850, passed 9-9-1992; Ord. MC-1306,
passed 6-2-2009; Ord. MC-1482, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-
2024)
§ 15.37.050 HISTORIC RESOURCE EVALUATION REPORT.
   (A)   A historic resource evaluation report required as a submittal for a
demolition permit application shall contain the following elements:
      (1)   Purpose and scope;
      (2)   Methods of evaluation: field and archival;
      (3)   Location and setting;
      (4)   Architectural description of the resource;
      (5)   Historical background;
      (6)   Discussion of eligibility for NR listing;
      (7)   Statement of significance;
      (8)   Conclusions;
      (9)   Recommendations (may include proposed mitigation); and
      (10)   Archival documentation (appendices).
   (B)   The statement of significance element (division (A)(7) above) shall be
made using the criteria listed in §
15.37.055 and shall include a discussion of the related historical contextual
themes.
   (C)   The archival documentation (division (A)(10) above) of the resource
shall include a completed DPR 523 Form and archival quality photo
documentation. This information shall be included as an appendix to the report.
   (D)   Preparation and submittal of the report shall be the responsibility of
the applicant. All reports shall be prepared by consultants who meet the
professional qualification standards for the field of historic preservation, as
described in the Federal Register.
(Ord. MC-694, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. MC-850, passed 9-9-1992; Ord. MC-1027,
passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1306, passed 6-2-2009; Ord. MC-1482, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 15.37.055 CRITERIA FOR DETERMINATION OF HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE.
   The criteria for determination of historical significance include the
following:
   (A)   The building or structure has character, interest or value as a part
of the heritage of the city;
   (B)   The location of the building or structure is the site of a significant
historic event;
   (C)   The building or structure is identified with a person(s) or group(s)
who significantly contributed to the culture and development of the city;
   (D)   The building or structure exemplifies a particular architectural style
or way of life important to the city;
   (E)   The building or structure exemplifies the best remaining architectural
type in a neighborhood;
   (F)   The building or structure is identified as the work of a person whose
work has influenced the heritage of the city, the state or the United States;
   (G)   The building or structure reflects outstanding attention to
architectural design, detail, materials or craftsmanship;
   (H)   The building or structure is related to landmarks or historic
districts and its preservation is essential to the integrity of the landmark or
historic district;
   (I)   The unique location or singular physical characteristics of the
building or structure represents an established and familiar feature of a
neighborhood; or
   (J)   The building, structure or site has the potential to yield historical
or archaeological information.
(Ord. MC-694, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. MC-850, passed 9-9-1992; Ord. MC-1306,
passed 6-2-2009; Ord. MC-1482, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 15.37.060 REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   Director review. The Director of Community Development and Housing
shall determine whether to issue a demolition permit for an application which
does not require a report in accordance with evaluation thresholds in division
(B) and (C) below and the requirements specified in §
15.37.045.
   (B)   The Development and Environmental Review Committee (“DERC”) review.
      (1)   An initial study (pursuant to the California Environmental Quality
Act) shall be prepared for a demolition permit application when a historical
resource evaluation report is required in accordance with §
15.37.045(A) through (C).
      (2)   The report may be included as an attachment to the initial study or
referenced in the initial study. The initial study shall be reviewed by the
DERC for an environmental determination in compliance with the provisions of
the California Environmental Quality Act and applicable city requirements.
Following the DERC review, the application and the environmental determination
shall be reviewed by the Arts and Historical Preservation Commission.
   (C)   Arts and Historical Preservation Commission review. The Arts and
Historical Preservation Commission shall receive notification of demolition
permit applications for which a historic resource evaluation report is prepared
for their review and make recommendations to the Planning Commission regarding
the historic significance of resources and the approval or denial of
applications.
   (D)   Planning Commission review.
      (1)   A demolition permit application for which a historic resource
evaluation report and initial study are prepared shall be scheduled for review
by the Planning Commission within 45 days of the DERC’s environmental
determination. The Planning Commission shall review demolition permit
applications to determine the historical significance of the resource based
upon the criteria set forth in §
15.37.055. The Planning Commission may also consider the National Register
criteria for evaluation.
      (2)   Based upon the information provided, the Planning Commission shall
take action on the environmental determination and approve or deny the issuance
of the demolition permit. The Planning Commission’s review must be completed
within 30 days of the first public hearing before the Planning Commission or
the application shall be forwarded to the Mayor and City Council.
      (3)   When a demolition permit application is denied because of a
determination of historical significance, the Planning Commission shall forward
that recommendation to the Mayor and City Council.
      (4)   If the Planning Commission approves the demolition permit
application, the demolition permit shall be issued in accordance with the
Planning Commission action and following compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and all other city requirements.
   (E)   Effective date of permit. Demolition permits shall become effective 16
days following the final date of action (i.e., approval) by the Director or the
Planning Commission, unless an appeal has been filed pursuant to §
15.37.070, which shall stay the issuance of the demolition permit until after
the appeal is decided.
(Ord. MC-694, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. MC-850, passed 9-9-1992; Ord. MC-1306,
passed 6-2-2009; Ord. MC-1482, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-
2024)
Statutory reference:
   California Environmental Quality Act, see Cal. Public Resources Code, §§
21000 et seq.
§ 15.37.070 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person may appeal the decisions of the Director of Community
Development and Housing pursuant to this chapter to the Planning Commission.
Decisions of the Planning Commission pursuant to this chapter may be appealed
to the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   An appeal must be submitted in writing with the required appeal fee
(if applicable) to the Department of Community Development and Housing within
15 days following the final date of the action for which an appeal is made. The
written appeal shall include the reason(s) why the historic resource evaluation
report should or should not be required; or why the demolition permit
application should be granted, denied or exempt from the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. MC-694, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. MC-850, passed 9-9-1992; Ord. MC-1027,
passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1306, passed 6-2-2009; Ord. MC-1482, passed 4-18-2018;
Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 15.37.080 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon conviction thereof, is
punishable in accordance with the provisions of §§
1.12.010 and
1.12.020 in addition to any other civil or administrative remedies.
(Ord. MC-694, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. MC-850, passed 9-9-1992; Ord. MC-1306,
passed 6-2-2009; Ord. MC-1482, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 15.37.085 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Deleted by Ord. MC-1482, passed 4-18-2018)
§ 15.37.090 FEES.
   Upon submittal of a demolition permit application to the Department of
Community Development and Housing, the applicant shall pay all applicable
Planning Division fees in the amounts as adopted by resolution of the Mayor and
City Council for an initial study and for the Planning Commission review. The
applicant shall pay all required Building Inspection Division fees in the
amounts as adopted by resolution of the Mayor and City Council prior to
issuance of a demolition permit. The applicant shall also pay all fees required
by other governmental agencies prior to issuance of a demolition permit.
(Ord. MC-694, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. MC-850, passed 9-9-1992; Ord. MC-1306,
passed 6-2-2009; Ord. MC-1482, passed 4-18-2018; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-
2024)
CHAPTER 15.38: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-880, passed 6-23-1993)
CHAPTER 15.40: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-880, passed 6-23-1993)
CHAPTER 15.44: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-880, passed 6-23-1993)
CHAPTER 15.48: SWIMMING POOLS
Section
   
15.48.010   Public policy
   
15.48.020   Person defined
   
15.48.030   Fence required
   
15.48.040   Gates and doors - specifications
   
15.48.050   Distance between inside of pool and rear lot line
   
15.48.060   Reserved
   
15.48.070   Soils engineering reports
   
15.48.080   Exemptions
   
15.48.090   Reserved
   
15.48.100   Existing pools
   
15.48.110   Reserved
§ 15.48.010 PUBLIC POLICY.
   It is found, declared and determined that private swimming pools shall be
fenced as a precautionary measure to prevent severe hazard to the health,
safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, particularly children.
(Ord. 2431, passed 4-2-1962)
§ 15.48.020 PERSON DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, PERSON shall include, but not be limited
to, any individual, firm, association, partnership, trust, corporation,
political subdivision within the city or other form of organization whether
operating for profit or otherwise.
(Ord. 2431, passed 4-2-1962)
§ 15.48.030 FENCE REQUIRED.
   Each person in possession of land within the city, as owner, purchaser under
contract, lessee, tenant, licensee or otherwise, upon which is situated a
swimming pool or other out-of-doors body of water or structure designed,
constructed or used, or capable of being used, for swimming or bathing, having
a depth in excess of 18 inches, shall maintain on the premises, completely
surrounding the pool or body of water, a fence or wall not less than four feet
in height. There shall be no openings, holes or gaps in the fence or wall
larger than four inches square, except that if a picket fence or other fence
constructed of vertical members is maintained, the open space between the
pickets or vertical members shall not exceed four inches horizontally and shall
be not less than 36 inches vertically. Openings, holes or gaps shall not be
constructed or maintained in a horizontal series constituting steps or other
means of access. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of
the required fence or wall.
(Ord. 2431, passed 4-2-1962; Ord. 3031, passed 12-9-1969; Ord. 3971, passed 9-
24-1980)
§ 15.48.040 GATES AND DOORS - SPECIFICATIONS.
   All gates or doors opening through the required enclosure shall be not less
than four feet high. Gates or doors shall be equipped with a self-closing and
self-latching device located within three inches of the required height of
fence or wall. Closing and latching devices shall be designed to be self-
closing and capable of keeping the door or gate securely closed at all times
when not in actual use. These requirements are to include pedestrian doors with
direct access to the rear yard from the garage. No gate or door across a
driveway providing access to any required parking area may open into the area
between a fence or wall and the pool or body of water.
(Ord. 2431, passed 4-2-1962; Ord. 3971, passed 9-24-1980; Ord. MC-1525, passed
1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.48.050 DISTANCE BETWEEN INSIDE OF POOL AND REAR LOT LINE.
   Any swimming pool constructed after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter shall be constructed so that there shall be at least
five feet between the inside or poolside face of the swimming pool and side or
rear lot line. No mechanical equipment shall be placed nearer than five feet to
any side lot line.
(Ord. 2431, passed 4-2-1962; Ord. 3031, passed 12-9-1969)
§ 15.48.060 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Ord. 2431, passed 4-2-1962; Ord. 3031, passed 12-9-1969; Ord. MC-1525, passed
1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.48.070 SOILS ENGINEERING REPORTS.
   (A)   Prior to issuance of a swimming pool permit, the Building Official may
require that the swimming pool plans shall be reviewed by an approved soils
engineer. All reports shall be subject to approval by the Building Official,
and supplemental reports and data may be required as he or she may deem
necessary. Recommendations included in the report and approved by the Building
Official shall be incorporated in the swimming pool plans by the permittee.
   (B)   Swimming pools constructed of materials that are subject to failure by
deterioration, tears or rips shall not be so located so that a failure would
possibly endanger any private property or result in the deposition of debris on
any public way.
(Ord. 2431, passed 4-2-1962; Ord. 3031, passed 12-9-1969)
§ 15.48.080 EXEMPTIONS.
   All swimming pools which are completely contained within the walls of a
building shall be exempt from the provisions of the fencing requirements.
(Ord. 2431, passed 4-2-1962; Ord. 3474, passed 1-22-1975)
§ 15.48.090 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Ord. 2431, passed 4-2-1962; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1525,
passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.48.100 EXISTING POOLS.
   Swimming pools in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this chapter shall be fenced in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter on or before July 1, 1962.
(Ord. 2431, passed 4-2-1962)
§ 15.48.110 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 15.52: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-781, passed 4-22-1991)
CHAPTER 15.55: CITY ASSUMPTION OF CODE ENFORCEMENT IN MOBILE HOME PARKS
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1379, passed 10-15-2012)
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on mobile homes, see Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§ 18000 et
seq.
CHAPTER 15.56: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-781, passed 4-22-1991)
CHAPTER 15.57: CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT CONSTRUCTION TAX
Section
   
15.57.010   Purpose
   
15.57.020   Definitions
   
15.57.030   Cultural development construction tax imposed
   
15.57.040   Time of payment
   
15.57.050   Tax - place of payment
   
15.57.060   Disposition of cultural development construction taxes
   
15.57.070   Severability
§ 15.57.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the payment of a tax
applicable to new construction or reconstruction of commercial structures to
provide funds for the promotion of fine art culture and other cultural
enhancements as the Mayor and City Council may direct. Enhancement of the
cultural development is deemed to be a public benefit to all citizens of the
community.
(Ord. MC-542, passed 9-11-1986; Ord. MC-650, passed 1-19-1989; Ord. MC-1451,
passed 12-20-2017)
§ 15.57.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL STRUCTURE. Any building or structure all or part of which
contains a commercial or industrial use permitted by this code; provided,
however, COMMERCIAL STRUCTURE shall not include any building or structure
constructed or reconstructed for the elderly and handicapped, pursuant to this
Title 15, or pursuant to Title 25 or 26 of the Cal. Code of Regulations.
   CONSTRUCTION COST. The total value of all construction or reconstruction
work on a commercial structure as determined by the Director of Community
Development, pursuant to §
15.04.080, in issuing a building permit for such construction or
reconstruction.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. All new commercial construction.
   RECONSTRUCTION. Additions, alterations, repairs or remodels made to an
existing commercial structure. RECONSTRUCTION is required to conform to the
requirements for new buildings, pursuant to the California Building Code and
this Title 15. RECONSTRUCTION necessitated by natural disaster or accidental
damage shall not be subject to this chapter; provided, however, that damage in
the normal course of business shall be included.
(Ord. MC-542, passed 9-11-1986; Ord. MC-650, passed 1-19-1989; Ord. MC-768,
passed 3-12-1991; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1451, passed 12-20-
2017; Ord. MC-1525, passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024; Ord. MC-
1643, passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.57.030 CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT CONSTRUCTION TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   A cultural development construction tax is imposed on the privilege of
new construction or reconstruction, as defined in §
15.57.020. Such a tax shall be equal to 0.5% of the construction cost.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the tax shall not be imposed
and charged for any permit for which an application together with two sets of
complete plans and specifications as required by §§ 301 and 302 of the
California Building Code are filed and approved with the city prior to
September 8, 1986; provided that the applicant has paid all plan check fees
prior to that date.
   (C)   No cultural development construction tax shall be charged for the
first reconstruction of any commercial structure up to its previously existing
square footage, if the previously existing commercial structure was voluntarily
demolished by the property owner after code enforcement has issued a notice of
violation/abatement.
(Ord. MC-542, passed 9-11-1986; Ord. MC-650, passed 1-19-1989; Ord. MC-768,
passed 3-12-1991; Ord. MC-1175, passed 7-22-2004; Ord. MC-1451, passed 12-20-
2017; Ord. MC-1525, passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.57.040 TIME OF PAYMENT.
   The cultural development construction tax required in §
15.57.030 to be paid shall be due and payable upon issuance by the city of a
building permit for the new construction or reconstruction of any commercial
structure; provided, however, that there shall be a refund of such tax in the
event that the building permit expires, within the meaning of § 302(d) of the
latest edition of the California Building Code adopted in the city, within 30
days after the date of such expiration, upon written application for such
refund by the person who paid such tax setting forth in full the facts showing
that such permit has expired. The full amount due under this chapter shall
constitute a debt to the city. An action for the collection thereof may be
commenced in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction of the
cause.
(Ord. MC-542, passed 9-11-1986; Ord. MC-650, passed 1-19-1989; Ord. MC-1451,
passed 12-20-2017; Ord. MC-1525, passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643, passed 10-2-
2024)
§ 15.57.050 TAX - PLACE OF PAYMENT.
   The tax shall be paid to the Building Official of the city, or his or her
authorized agent, in the City Department of Community Development and Housing.
(Ord. MC-542, passed 9-11-1986; Ord. MC-650, passed 1-19-1989; Ord. MC-1027,
passed 9-9-1998; Ord. MC-1451, passed 12-20-2017; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-
2024)
§ 15.57.060 DISPOSITION OF CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT CONSTRUCTION TAXES.
   The funds derived from this tax shall be placed in the General Fund with
identification as to the source, so that the Mayor and City Council may
consider appropriate expenditures in its annual budget for allocation to
cultural development activities in the city or such other uses as the Mayor and
City Council may direct. The use of the funds shall be reviewed annually by the
Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. MC-542, passed 9-11-1986; Ord. MC-650, passed 1-19-1989; Ord. MC-1451,
passed 12-20-2017)
§ 15.57.070 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent
provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of the chapter.
(Ord. MC-542, passed 9-11-1986; Ord. MC-650, passed 1-19-1989; Ord. MC-1451,
passed 12-20-2017)
CHAPTER 15.60: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-880, passed 6-23-1993)
CHAPTER 15.64: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-84, passed 7-21-1981)
CHAPTER 15.68: WASHERS, DRYERS, EXTRACTORS AND COMPRESSORS
Section
   
15.68.010   Purpose
   
15.68.020   Permit for installation - fee
   
15.68.030   Operation prohibited when excessive ground vibration occurs
   
15.68.040   Distance of commercial laundry compressor from other buildings
   
15.68.050   Requirements in addition to building code and other laws
   
15.68.060   Reserved
§ 15.68.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the installation, operation and
maintenance of equipment or machinery, including, but not limited to, washers,
dryers, extractors and washer extractors of 55-pound capacity or larger, and
compressors.
(Ord. 3064, passed 4-7-1970)
§ 15.68.020 PERMIT FOR INSTALLATION - FEE.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall install any equipment or
machinery without first obtaining a permit from the Department of Development
Services. The fee for such permit shall be $10. Such fee shall be in addition
and supplemental to any other fee charged for the installation of such
equipment or machinery.
   (B)   A design drawing and calculations shall be submitted with the
application for a permit showing all information pertaining to the equipment or
machinery which is necessary for a determination of foundation requirements in
order that it may operate efficiently, safely and with a minimum of vibration.
A requirement of installation based on the design shall be that the ground
vibration inherently and recurrently generated does not cause a displacement of
the earth greater than 0.033 of one inch as measured at any point radially in
any plane from the foundation, as determined by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 3064, passed 4-7-1970; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 15.68.030 OPERATION PROHIBITED WHEN EXCESSIVE GROUND VIBRATION OCCURS.
   (A)   No person shall operate any of the above equipment or machinery which,
due to faulty installation, maintenance or operation, causes a ground vibration
in excess of that described in §
15.68.020. If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, equipment or machinery
presently in operation does cause such excessive vibration, the Superintendent
of the Development Services Department may require the operator to submit all
the information required for an original installation of such equipment or
machinery.
   (B)   If such information shows to the satisfaction of the City Engineer
that the existing installation of such equipment or machinery does not meet the
required standards, changes and modifications of installation, it shall be
required to obtain compliance with the standards before the operation of the
equipment or machinery may be continued.
(Ord. 3064, passed 4-7-1970; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 15.68.040 DISTANCE OF COMMERCIAL LAUNDRY COMPRESSOR FROM OTHER BUILDINGS.
   Any commercial laundry compressor maintained outside of the commercial
building on the premises shall be at least 75 feet from any other building
occupied as a residential dwelling unless provision is made to completely
enclose the compressor in accordance with the minimum standards set forth in a
drawing marked “commercial laundry compressor” on file in the Department of
Development Services, City Hall, San Bernardino, California.
(Ord. 3064, passed 4-7-1970; Ord. MC-1027, passed 9-9-1998)
§ 15.68.050 REQUIREMENTS IN ADDITION TO BUILDING CODE AND OTHER LAWS.
   The requirements of this chapter are in addition and supplemental to any
other requirements set forth in the California Building Code or other laws.
(Ord. 3064, passed 4-7-1970; Ord. MC-1525, passed 1-15-2020; Ord. MC-1643,
passed 10-2-2024)
§ 15.68.060 RESERVED.
[Reserved]
(Repealed by Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985)
CHAPTER 15.72: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-781, passed 4-22-1991)
CHAPTER 15.73: VERDEMONT AREA - INFRASTRUCTURE FEE
Section
   
15.73.010   Findings and determination
   
15.73.020   Rules of construction
   
15.73.030   Definitions
   
15.73.040   Persons subject to infrastructure fee
   
15.73.050   Infrastructure fee
   
15.73.060   Time of payment
   
15.73.065   Deferral
   
15.73.070   Establishment of Infrastructure Fee Fund
   
15.73.080   Use of funds
   
15.73.090   Refunds
   
15.73.100   Penalties
   
15.73.110   Severability
   
15.73.120   Other fees
§ 15.73.010 FINDINGS AND DETERMINATION.
   The Mayor and City Council find and determine as follows.
   (A)   The city must provide for the acquisition, construction and
installation of certain right-of-way and related infrastructure improvements
(as hereinafter defined and as hereinafter referred to as the “right-of-way
improvements”) and certain other public improvements (as hereinafter described
and as hereinafter referred to as the “public improvements”) within the
Verdemont Area of the city in order to maintain current levels of service if
new development is to be accommodated without decreasing current levels of
service and in order to ensure that the infrastructure system is in conformity
with the requirements of the city’s general plan.
   (B)   It is in the interests of the present landowners within the Verdemont
Area and the residents, both within the Verdemont Area and within the city
generally, that the city causes the acquisition, construction and installation
of the right-of-way improvements and the public improvements within the
Verdemont Area.
   (C)   The imposition of infrastructure development fees (the “infrastructure
fees”) is one of the preferred methods of ensuring that development in the
Verdemont Area bares a proportionate share of the cost of capital facilities
necessary to accommodate such development in order to effectively provide the
quality and extent of infrastructure required within the Verdemont Area.
   (D)   Development within the Verdemont Area will:
      (1)   Generate increased traffic volumes necessitating the acquisition,
construction and installation of the right of-way improvements; and
      (2)   Create a need for the acquisition, construction and installation of
the public improvements.
   (E)   Revenues generated from the levy of the infrastructure fees will be
used to facilitate the acquisition, construction and installation of the right-
of-way improvements and the public improvements which in turn will allow for
the future development of property within the Verdemont Area by providing
additional traffic flow capacity and other public improvements;
   (F)   The infrastructure fees established by §
15.73.050 shall be calculated pursuant to a resolution duly adopted by the
Mayor and City Council simultaneously herewith (the “resolution”). The
infrastructure fees established by this chapter and as calculated pursuant to
the resolution are derived from, and based upon, and do not exceed the costs of
undertaking the acquisition, construction and installation of the right-of-way
improvements.
   (G)   It is anticipated that certain excess revenues may be generated
through the levy of the infrastructure fees for the acquisition, construction
and installation of the right-of-way improvements, and to the extent such
revenues are generated, such revenues as are in excess of the amount required
for the acquisition, construction and installation of the right-of-way
improvements shall be used for the purposes of funding the acquisition,
construction and installation of the public improvements, as defined in §
15.73.030; provided, however, that if such excess revenues are not generated,
then the infrastructure fees established by §
15.73.050 and calculated pursuant to the resolution will be increased in
accordance with the terms of the resolution or any subsequent resolution
adopted by the Mayor and the City Council in order to cause the funding of the
acquisition, construction and installation of the public improvements.
   (H)   That certain engineers report entitled “Engineers Report - Right-of-
Way Improvements - Verdemont Area” (the “engineers report”) sets forth the
scope and extent of the right-of-way improvements and the public improvements
required in the Verdemont Area and sets forth a reasonable methodology and
analysis for the determination of the impact of development on the need for,
and costs of, acquisition, construction and installation of the right-of-way
improvements and the public improvements in the Verdemont Area.
   (I)   This chapter shall apply only to that area of the city known as the
Verdemont Area and is intended to assist in the continued development of the
Verdemont Area.
   (J)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use and development of
land so as to assure that new development bears a proportionate share of the
cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide right-of-way improvements and
public improvements within or for the benefit of the Verdemont Area.
   (K)   The city has the authority to enact this chapter pursuant to the Cal.
Gov’t Code, §§ 66000 et seq. and the City Charter.
(Ord. MC-707, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 15.73.020 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed so as to
effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety
and welfare.
   (B)   For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter,
unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the following rules of construction
shall apply to the text of this chapter.
      (1)   In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this chapter and any caption, illustration or summary table, the text
shall control.
      (2)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary; the
word “may” is permissive.
      (3)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; and
words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary.
      (4)   The word “person” includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an unincorporated association or any other similar entity.
      (5)   The word “includes” shall not limit the term to the specific
example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or
circumstances of like kind or character.
(Ord. MC-707, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 15.73.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVELOPMENT. Every project for which either:
      (1)   A building permit is required, except that it shall not include
those projects increasing either the size or value of a single-family residence
by 25% or less; or
      (2)   A permit is required in connection with the installation of a
mobile home.
   ENGINEER’S REPORT. The certain engineer’s report prepared for the Verdemont
Area, dated January 3, 1990.
   EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT. Refers to a numerical value designation for
residentially zoned property whereby one EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT is equivalent
to a residential unit whether such residential unit is a single-family attached
or detached unit, or multi-family unit within a multi-family structure, or a
mobile home. For land uses other than residential uses, the EQUIVALENT DWELLING
UNIT shall equal the density of residential units that could be built per acre
as determined by the zoning of the immediately adjacent or, if not immediately
adjacent, the most proximate residentially zoned property.
   FEE PAYER. A person commencing a land development activity which generates
traffic, necessitates the construction of additional publicly owned facilities
or improvements and which requires the issuance of a building permit or a
permit for the installation of a mobile home.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. The acquisition, construction and installation of
drainage facilities, park facilities, fire station facilities and landscaping,
all as more fully described in the engineer’s report.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY IMPROVEMENTS. The acquisition, construction and installation of
full width streets, including full-width paving, curbs and gutters, sidewalks,
street lights, sewer mains, storm drains, catch basins and water mains in the
following locations and all as more fully described in the engineer’s report.
Belmont Avenue
   Olive to Palm (portions)
   Palm to just past Little League Drive
   Pine to Olive (limited portions)
Irvington
   Olive to Magnolia
   Pine to Olive (portions)
Little League Drive
   Irvington to Verdemont
Magnolia Avenue
   Verdemont Avenue to Little League Drive
Meyers Road
   Little League Drive to New Section
   New Section to Cable Canyon
Ohio Avenue
   Cable Canyon Road
   Frontage Road
   Little League Drive to
   Meyers Road to Frontage Road (new roadway)
   Palm Avenue
   Palm to city limits (Devore)
   Palm to Pine (portions)
   Palm to west of Little League Drive
   Pine to Palm (portions)
   Verdemont Avenue
Olive Avenue
   Belmont to Irvington
   Ohio to Belmont (portions)
   Verdemont Avenue to Ohio
Portions of Palm Avenue
   Between Kendall Drive and Verdemont Avenue, which portions are immediately
adjacent to undeveloped projects
Walnut Avenue
   Belmont to Ohio (portions)
   Irvington to Belmont
 
   VERDEMONT AREA. The area of the City of San Bernardino, delineated by the
Verdemont Area Plan, adopted by the Mayor and City Council on November 17,
1986, excepting therefrom that area southwesterly of Kendall Drive, from the
southerly boundary of the Verdemont Area Plan to Palm Avenue and portions north
of Kendall Drive and southeasterly of Pine as shown in the engineer’s report,
and southwesterly of Route I-215 Freeway, from Palm Avenue to the northerly
boundary of the Verdemont Area plan and as more fully described in the
engineer’s report.
(Ord. MC-707, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 15.73.040 PERSONS SUBJECT TO INFRASTRUCTURE FEE.
   Any person who seeks to develop land within the Verdemont Area by applying
for a building permit, an extension of a building permit, a permit for a mobile
home installation or an extension of a permit for mobile home installation to
make improvements to land which will generate additional traffic or increase
the need for public facilities is required to pay an infrastructure fee in the
manner set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. MC-707, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 15.73.050 INFRASTRUCTURE FEE.
   (A)   The infrastructure fee for any given parcel of property shall be
determined by ascertaining the land use category of the parcel and multiplying
the amount of the infrastructure fee by the number of equivalent dwelling units
allocated to such land use category. The initial amount of the infrastructure
fee shall be set by the resolution, and may be subject to increase pursuant to
the terms of any subsequent resolutions to be adopted by the Mayor and City
Council, which resolutions shall provide for increases to the infrastructure
fee in order to cover any administrative and carrying costs incurred in
connection with the issuance of bonds required in order to finance the
acquisition, construction and installation of all or any portion of the right-
of-way improvements and/or the public improvements.
   (B)   It is anticipated that there may be certain excess revenues generated
in connection with the levy of the infrastructure fee in the initial dollar
amounts and to the extent any such excess revenues do exist, said excess
revenues will be applied to fund the costs of the acquisition, construction and
installation of the public improvements. To the extent said excess revenues do
not exist, the infrastructure fee in the dollar amount, as initially
established, may be subject to additional increases by subsequent resolutions
of the Mayor and City Council in order to cause the funding of the acquisition,
construction and installation of the public improvements.
   (C)   The above-referenced subsequent resolutions and the dollar amount of
the infrastructure fee initially established pursuant to this chapter and the
resolution shall be reviewed and amended at least annually, or more often as
may be necessary under the circumstances to reflect any increases in costs.
      (1)   For applications for an extension of a building permit or an
extension of a permit for mobile home installation, the amount of the fee is
the difference between the fee then applicable and any amounts previously paid
in connection with the application for the initial permit.
      (2)   In the case of change of use, rehabilitation, expansion or
modification of an existing use which requires the issuance of a building
permit or permit for mobile home installation, the infrastructure fee shall be
based upon the net positive increase in the demands placed upon the right-of-
way improvements and the public improvements by the new or expanded use
compared to the previous use or level of use.
(Ord. MC-707, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 15.73.060 TIME OF PAYMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Except as may otherwise be provided in division (B) below, each
applicant for a commercial or industrial building permit shall pay to the city
the then applicable infrastructure fee, as initially established pursuant to
this chapter and adjusted pursuant to any subsequent resolutions of the city as
more fully described in §
15.73.050, upon the submission to the city of an application for a commercial
or industrial building permit, which application is complete and in a form
acceptable to the city. Each applicant for a residential building permit who
submits an application, which application is complete and in the form
acceptable to the city, shall pay to the city the then applicable
infrastructure fee, as initially established pursuant to this chapter and
adjusted pursuant to any subsequent resolutions of the city as more fully
described in §
15.73.050, for all residential units subject to a building permit upon the
earlier of the following dates:
         (a)   Upon the date of final inspection of the first dwelling unit
completed in the residential development to which the building permit is
applicable; or
         (b)   Upon the date a certificate of occupancy is issued for the first
dwelling unit completed in the residential development to which the building
permit is applicable.
      (2)   In the event the city accepts any payment of infrastructure fees in
connection with the submission of a building permit application, which
application is incomplete or not in a form satisfactory to the city, all
payments made in connection with such application shall be returned to the
applicant and such applicant shall be required to submit a complete and
acceptable application, and, at the time of such submission, shall pay any then
applicable infrastructure fees. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the
contrary, the city, by official action of the Mayor and City Council, may
require the payment of applicable infrastructure fees for residential units
prior to the approval of a final tract or parcel map applicable to residential
development if one of the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The City Director of Development Services has determined that
the applicable infrastructure fee will be collected from the subdivider for
public improvements or facilities for which an account has been established and
funds have been appropriated, and for which the city has adopted a proposed
construction schedule or plan; or
         (b)   The applicable infrastructure fee will reimburse the city for
expenditures previously made by the city. All applicants for permits for the
installation of mobile homes will be subject to the procedures applicable to
residential developments set forth hereinabove.
   (B)   Any person or entity who would otherwise be required to pay the
infrastructure fee, pursuant to division (A) above, may receive as a credit
towards the infrastructure fee attributable to such person or entity, all or a
portion of the costs of any right-of-way improvements or public improvements
that may be or may have been acquired, constructed or installed by such an
entity.
   (C)   All funds collected shall be promptly identified as right-of-way/
public improvement infrastructure fees and promptly transferred for deposit in
the appropriate Right-of-Way/Public Improvement Infrastructure Fee Fund to be
held in a separate account and, together with interest earnings thereon, used
solely for the purposes specified in this chapter.
   (D)   Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, for any
subdivision for which a final map has been approved prior to the effective date
of this chapter, the fee established pursuant to §
15.73.050 may be paid at the close of escrow on each individual lot, unless a
later time is allowed by this chapter.
(Ord. MC-707, passed 3-19-1990; Ord. MC-755, passed 11-21-1990; Ord. MC-1027,
passed 9-9-1998)
§ 15.73.065 DEFERRAL.
   For the construction of new single-family homes, the fees imposed by §
15.73.060 may be deferred at the request of the owner of the property until the
release of utilities is issued or 18 months from the issuance of the building
permit, whichever is less. The owner of the property must personally guarantee
payment of the fees, sign documents authorizing the city to place a lien on the
property in the amount of the fees, agree to place the payment of the fees in
any escrow for the sale of the property, authorize the city to demand payment
in any such escrow and pay an administrative fee set by resolution of the Mayor
and City Council. The amount of the fees due shall be the amount in effect at
the time of collection of the fees. In no event shall utilities be released
until the fees are paid, except that electrical service may be released at the
discretion of the Building Official where necessary for security or maintenance
purposes.
(Ord. MC-961, passed 3-20-1996; Ord. MC-1011, passed 12-16-1997; Ord. MC-1044,
passed 4-7-1999; Ord. MC-1045, passed 4-20-1999)
§ 15.73.070 ESTABLISHMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE FEE FUND.
   There is established a Right-of-Way/Public Improvement Infrastructure Fee
Fund. The funds withdrawn from this account must be used in accordance with the
provisions of §
15.73.080.
(Ord. MC-707, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 15.73.080 USE OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Funds collected from the infrastructure fees shall be used for the
purpose of causing the acquisition, construction and installation of the right-
of-way improvements and/or public improvements within the Verdemont Area, as
more specifically described in the engineer’s report.
   (B)   No funds collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used for periodic
or routine maintenance.
   (C)   Funds may also be used to pay debt service on bonds or similar debt
instruments issued in order to provide financing for the acquisition,
construction and installation of the right-of-way improvements and/or the
public improvements for which the infrastructure fee may be expended.
(Ord. MC-707, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 15.73.090 REFUNDS.
   Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter
immediately following six years from the date the infrastructure fee was paid
shall, upon application of the then current landowner, be returned to such
landowner with accrued interest thereon; provided the landowner submits an
application for refund to the City Finance Officer within 180 days of the
expiration of the six-year period.
(Ord. MC-707, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 15.73.100 PENALTIES.
   A violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as
misdemeanors are prosecuted and, upon conviction, the violator shall be
punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal
prosecution, the city shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-707, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 15.73.110 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this chapter is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such portion or portions hereof shall be deemed to be a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. MC-707, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 15.73.120 OTHER FEES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the payment of infrastructure fees as set forth in
this chapter, any developer or fee payer shall be responsible for the payment
of any applicable installation fees, sewer connection fees, water acquisition
charges or other fees or charges levied by the city and all other public bodies
in connection with the development of property with the Verdemont Area, and
such developer or fee payer shall either:
      (1)   Provide for the acquisition, construction and installation of any
and all other public improvements required by the city of such developer or fee
payer as a condition to approval of any development which are in addition to
both:
         (a)   The right-of-way improvements to be funded by the infrastructure
fees as established by this chapter in the initial dollar amount; and
         (b)   The public improvements to be funded by subsequent increases to
the infrastructure fees or as established by this chapter in the initial dollar
amount.
      (2)   Pay any other on- or off-site improvement fees, assessments or
special taxes as may be levied by the city as a condition to the approval of
any development in lieu of the actual acquisition, construction or installation
of public improvements as set forth in division (A)(1) above.
   (B)   Unless a developer or fee payer has provided for the payment of
infrastructure fees in an amount to provide for the acquisition, construction
and installation of the right-of-way improvements and the public improvements,
plus any financing costs, if applicable, or has constructed a proportionate
share of the right-of-way improvements and the public improvements, such
developer or fee payer shall not be relieved from the obligation to participate
in any benefit assessment district or special tax district established for the
purpose of funding that portion of the right-of-way improvements and/or the
public improvements not covered by the infrastructure fees as may have been
previously paid by a developer or fee payer.
(Ord. MC-707, passed 3-19-1990)
CHAPTER 15.74: VIOLATION - PENALTY
Section
   
15.74.010   Violation - penalty
§ 15.74.010 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as a principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, who erects, constructs, enlarges, alters, repairs,
moves, improves, removes, converts or demolishes a building or a structure for
which a building permit is required by this title and the adopted codes, and
for which a permit has not been obtained from the Building Official, or
otherwise violates any provision of the adopted codes, or this title, shall be
guilty of either an infraction or a misdemeanor. Any person, firm or
corporation, whether as a principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating,
or causing the violation of, any provision of the Fire Code is guilty of a
misdemeanor, which, upon conviction thereof, is punishable in accordance with
the provisions of §
1.12.010.
   (B)   Each day during any part of which the activity prohibited by division
(A) above continues, or a violation of the adopted codes continues to exist,
shall be a separate and distinct offense. The imposition of any penalty for any
violation of this title shall not excuse the violation or permit it to be
continued, and all persons shall be required to correct or remedy all such
violations or defects within a reasonable time. The application of any penalty
shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Ord. MC-460, passed 5-15-1985; Ord. MC-728, passed 5-8-1990; Ord. MC-1261,
passed 12-4-2007; Ord. MC-1262, passed 12-18-2007)
TITLE 16: SIGNS
   Chapter
      
16.04.   RESERVED
      
16.08.   RESERVED
      
16.12.   POLITICAL SIGNS
      
16.16.   STREET BANNER PERMIT
      
16.18.   UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Cross-reference:
   For additional sign provisions in this code, see Chapter 19.60
Statutory reference:
   For provisions on local regulation of signs, see Cal. Gov’t Code, §§ 38774
and 65850 and Cal. Business and Professions Code, §§ 5229 et seq.
CHAPTER 16.04: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-92, passed 8-18-1981)
CHAPTER 16.08: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-92, passed 8-18-1981)
CHAPTER 16.12: POLITICAL SIGNS
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1416, passed 8-17-2015)
CHAPTER 16.16: STREET BANNER PERMIT
Section
   
16.16.010   Filing of application
   
16.16.020   Granting of permits
   
16.16.030   Duration of permit
   
16.16.040   Deposit
   
16.16.050   Erection and removal of street banner
   
16.16.060   Standard specifications
   
16.16.070   Appeal
§ 16.16.010 FILING OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   A STREET BANNER is defined as a banner extended over a public street
or other public property, either on an established bridge or independently
suspended. The locations permissible for the erection of street banners within
the city are:
      (1)   The “E” Street pedestrian foot bridge between the Maruko [Radisson]
Hotel and Convention Center and Central City Mall. The banner will be installed
on hand rails on the south side of the bridge, facing northbound traffic; and
      (2)   On “E” Street, immediately north of Church Street. The banner will
be installed between streetlight standards, facing northbound traffic; requests
for street banner installation at any other location within the city over a
public street will require approval of the City Administrator.
   (B)   An applicant for a street banner permit shall obtain, complete and
file with the City Administrator an application which shall contain the
following:
      (1)   The location, dimensions and purpose of the banner;
      (2)   A facsimile of the proposed banner;
      (3)   The proposed date when the banner will be installed, which must be
at least ten days after the date of the application;
      (4)   The proposed date when the banner will be removed; and
      (5)   A hold harmless clause in language approved by the City Attorney.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 2802, passed 3-14-1967; Ord. 3804, passed 2-8-
1979; Ord. MC-689, passed 12-8-1989)
§ 16.16.020 GRANTING OF PERMITS.
   Permits for street banners issued under this chapter shall be granted only
to non-profit civic organizations or governmental bodies for the purpose of
bringing to the attention of the public the events which are of a general
public interest, or of welcoming conventions or similar gatherings and shall be
subject to such terms and conditions as shall be reasonably imposed. No permits
shall be issued to further political or religious purposes, or purposes
primarily involving private financial gain. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to prohibit the issuance of a permit for a street banner welcoming
the convention or similar gathering of a private, religious or political
organization.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 2802, passed 3-14-1967; Ord. 3804, passed 2-8-
1979; Ord. MC-689, passed 12-8-1989)
§ 16.16.030 DURATION OF PERMIT.
   Permits for street banners shall be granted for a period of not more than
seven days unless a longer period is specifically requested and justified due
to special or extraordinary circumstances.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 2802, passed 3-14-1967; Ord. MC-689, passed
12-8-1989)
§ 16.16.040 DEPOSIT.
   Each applicant shall make a deposit of money with the city, in an amount
specified by resolution, to cover the costs of permit issuance and the cost of
erection and removal of each banner where required by this chapter.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 2802, passed 3-14-1967; Ord. 3804, passed 2-8-
1979; Ord. MC-144, passed 3-16-1982; Ord. MC-427, passed 1-25-1985; Ord. MC-
689, passed 12-8-1989)
§ 16.16.050 ERECTION AND REMOVAL OF STREET BANNER.
   Each such banner shall be furnished by the applicant at its cost, at least
one day prior to the date the banners to be erected. Each street banner shall
be erected and removed by the city.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 2802, passed 3-14-1967; Ord. MC-427, passed 1-
25-1985; Ord. MC-689, passed 12-8-1989)
§ 16.16.060 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   Each banner shall be constructed in conformity with the specifications and
requirements of the city, as adopted, from time to time, by resolution.
(Ord. MC-689, passed 12-8-1989)
§ 16.16.070 APPEAL.
   An applicant may appeal to the City Council from the denial of a permit or
from the terms and conditions of a permit. Such appeal shall be in accordance
with the provisions of
Chapter 2.64.
(Ord. 821, passed 8-9-1921; Ord. 3804, passed 2-8-1979; Ord. MC-410, passed 9-
17-1984; Ord. MC-689, passed 12-8-1989)
CHAPTER 16.18: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
   
16.18.010   Definitions
   
16.18.020   Prohibitions
   
16.18.030   Abatement
   
16.18.040   Cost of removal
   
16.18.050   Collection of costs
   
16.18.060   Violation - penalty
   
16.18.070   Appeal
Editor’s note:
   Ord. MC-1343, passed 12-20-2010 contains “16.18.070 Appeal” in the table of
contents, but does not have any text for that section.
   This chapter is added by Ord. MC-1343, passed 12-20-2010.
§ 16.18.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter only, unless otherwise apparent from
context, words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated. The definitions in this chapter are included for
reference purposes only and are not intended to narrow the scope of definitions
set forth in federal, state or other applicable laws or regulations. Words used
in this chapter in the singular may include the plural and the plural may
include the singular. Use of the masculine shall also mean feminine and neuter.
   CODE. The San Bernardino Municipal Code.
   DEVELOPMENT CODE. Title 19 of the San Bernardino Municipal Code.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Community Development and Housing, or his or her
designee.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The person liable for placement of a sign. The following
is a non-exclusive list of facts, which, when found to exist, shall constitute
prima facie evidence that a person is a RESPONSIBLE PARTY:
      (1)   Based on information contained on the sign, and information from
other sources, the person is identified as the owner or lessee of property used
for the activity or event, and/or is the sponsor or promoter of the activity or
event described on the sign; and
      (2)   Based on information that appears on the sign, and information from
other sources, including, but not limited to, information establishing the
individual or corporate identity of the owner of the sign, it is found that the
person placed the sign or caused the sign to be placed.
   SIGN. Any notice, writing of letters, words or numerals, pictorial
presentation, illustrations or decorations, emblems or devices, symbols or
trademarks, flags, banners or pennants, graphic announcement, posters, pictures
or any item used to convey any message or idea.
(Ord. MC-1343, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
§ 16.18.020 PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall place, affix, erect, extend, project over, suspend or
maintain, or cause to be placed, affixed, erected, extended, suspended or
maintained, any unauthorized sign in, over or on public property, public
utility poles, light poles, public rights-of-way, trees in the public right-of-
way or on publicly owned or maintained land unless:
      (1)   The prior approval by the owner of the public property for
placement of the sign appears on the sign or has otherwise been provided to the
city, in writing, prior to such placement;
      (2)   (a)   The public property is a traditional public forum, such as
the park or the sidewalk, and the sign is held or personally attended to by one
or more persons.
         (b)   PERSONALLY ATTENDED means that the person is in such control of
the sign as to prevent the infliction of damage upon the sign or the infliction
of physical damage by the sign.
      (3)   Placement is otherwise permitted by the Development Code or other
applicable law of the city.
(Ord. MC-1343, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 16.18.030 ABATEMENT.
   A violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. The Director
is authorized to proceed with the summary abatement of such public nuisance by
causing the sign to be removed and destroyed without prior notice to the
responsible party. If the responsible party can be identified and located, any
sign so removed may be stored by the Director pending any action to recover the
city’s costs of removal.
(Ord. MC-1343, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 16.18.040 COST OF REMOVAL.
   The costs of the removal of any sign by city employees and/or city
contractors pursuant to this chapter shall be borne by the responsible party.
The costs of removal shall be established by separate resolution of the Mayor
and City Council.
(Ord. MC-1343, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 16.18.050 COLLECTION OF COSTS.
   Unpaid costs of removal shall be a debt to the city and subject to all
remedies for debt collection as allowed by law.
(Ord. MC-1343, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 16.18.060 VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   (A)   A violation of this chapter may be enforced or punished in any manner
prescribed by law or through any other process or procedure established or
allowed by this code or applicable law.
   (B)   It shall not be a defense to a violation of this chapter that the
responsible party was unaware that the property on which the sign was posted is
public property.
(Ord. MC-1343, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 16.18.070 APPEAL.
[Reserved]
(Ord. MC-1343, passed 12-20-2010)
TITLE 17: ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
   Chapter
      
17.04.   RESERVED
      
17.05.   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN
      
17.06.   WATER WISE LANDSCAPE PROGRAM
      
17.07.   WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE
      
17.08.   MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 17.04: RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. MC-781, passed 4-22-1991)
CHAPTER 17.05: HAZARDOUS WASTE
MANAGEMENT PLAN
Section
   
17.05.010   Applicability
   
17.05.020   Hazardous waste facility defined
§ 17.05.010 APPLICABILITY.
   Any application for a zoning amendment, subdivision, conditional use permit
or variance for a hazardous waste facility shall comply with Chapter 5 of the
County Hazardous Waste Management Plan, entitled “Siting of Specified Hazardous
Waste Facilities” attached as Attachment “1” and incorporated herein by
reference, in addition to complying with all other applicable city ordinances.
(Ord. MC-766, passed 12-17-1990)
§ 17.05.020 HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY DEFINED.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, §
25117.1, means all contiguous land and structures, other appurtenances and
improvements on the land used for the treatment, transfer, storage, resource
recovery, disposal or recycling of hazardous waste. A HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY
may consist of one or more treatment, transfer, storage, resource recovery,
disposal or recycling hazardous waste management units, or combinations of
these units.
(Ord. MC-766, passed 12-17-1990)
CHAPTER 17.06: WATER WISE LANDSCAPE PROGRAM
Section
   
17.06.010   Purpose and intent
   
17.06.020   Definitions
   
17.06.030   Applicability
   
17.06.040   Water wise landscape program
   
17.06.050   Administration
   
17.06.060   Program requirements
   
17.06.070   Action on application
   
17.06.080   Temporary limited exemption from specified code provisions
   
17.06.090   Fire hazard prohibited
   
17.06.100   Yard sign
   
17.06.110   Certificate of completion
   
17.06.120   Failure to timely complete installation
   
17.06.130   Withdrawal from program
   
17.06.140   False statement in required documents
   
17.06.150   Severability
   
17.06.160   CEQA exemption
§ 17.06.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage water conservation in the
city by facilitating the voluntary conversion of existing residential
landscaping to less water-intensive landscaping. The provisions contained in
this chapter are intended to permit property owners to retire existing
vegetation by temporary non-irrigation of their property, without being subject
to provisions of this code that otherwise would effectively preclude this
practice.
   (B)   Except as specifically stated in this chapter, nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to exempt any person or property from any otherwise
applicable provision of this code.
§ 17.06.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGREEMENT. The water wise landscape agreement described in this chapter.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino.
   CODE. The Municipal Code of the City of San Bernardino.
   DEPARTMENT. The Development Services Department of the City of San
Bernardino.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Development Services of the City of San
Bernardino, or his or her designee.
   GUIDELINES. The Water Wise Landscape Guidelines developed by the Water
Resources Institute, California State University, San Bernardino.
   PERMIT. The water wise landscaping permit described in this chapter.
   PROGRAM or WATER WISE LANDSCAPE PROGRAM. The City of San Bernardino’s water
wise landscape program described in this chapter.
   WATER WISE LANDSCAPE. A landscape that uses drought tolerant, California
friendly landscaping in lieu of large turf areas and that uses efficient
irrigation.
§ 17.06.030 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to single-family residential properties in the
city.
§ 17.06.040 WATER WISE LANDSCAPE PROGRAM.
   There is established the city water wise landscape program.
§ 17.06.050 ADMINISTRATION.
   The program shall be administered by the Director through the Department.
§ 17.06.060 PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS.
   To participate in the program, a property owner must:
   (A)   Own a single-family residential property in the city with existing
landscaping, and occupy the property continuously for the entire period of time
that the property is subject to the program;
   (B)   Have the desire and the ability to convert the existing landscaping on
the property to less water-intensive landscaping;
   (C)   (1)   Sign and submit to the Department a properly completed
application for participation in the program, in a form prescribed by the
Department for that purpose; and
      (2)   The application must accurately set forth:
         (a)   The street address and Assessor’s Parcel Number of the property;
         (b)   A description of the landscaping that is to be retired and
replaced;
         (c)   1.   A description of the water wise landscape that is to be
installed; and
            2.   The landscape must conform to the guidelines, as follows.
               a.   The landscape shall consist of water-efficient, drought
tolerant and native plant material, and may include ground covers, small
plants, shrubs and appropriate trees. Buffer areas and bioswales may be
included and may be designed with rocks, cobble or decomposed granite,
landscaped shrubs or accents or suitable ground cover.
               b.   All planted areas must be a minimum of one-inch below
adjacent hardscapes (sidewalks and driveways) to eliminate runoff and overflow
of irrigation water.
               c.   Mounded or sloped planting areas that would contribute to
runoff of irrigation water onto non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways or
structures must be avoided.
               d.   Any turf areas shall be set back at least 24 inches from
curbs, driveways, sidewalks or any other area that may result in runoff of
irrigation water onto streets.
               e.   Plants having similar water requirements should be grouped
together in hydrozones so that watering can be done efficiently.
               f.   Annual color plantings should be used only in areas of high
visibility where they can be seen and appreciated. Otherwise, perennial
plantings should be the primary source of color.
               g.   Landscaping must not obstruct or interfere with street
signs, lights or visibility on roads or walkways.
         (d)   The date on which the installation of the replacement
landscaping will begin, which shall not be later than 12 months from the date
of submittal of the application; and
         (e)   The date on which the installation of the replacement
landscaping will be completed, which must not be later than the next May 31
immediately following the date on which the installation is to begin.
   (D)   Sign and submit to the Department a properly completed water wise
landscape agreement. The agreement shall require that the participant agree to
maintain the replacement landscaping to ensure water efficiency.
§ 17.06.070 ACTION ON APPLICATION.
   (A)   After a properly completed application has been submitted, the
Director shall review the application and shall verify that the proposed
project will comply with all applicable requirements of this code. Upon making
this verification, the Director shall approve the application and shall issue
to the applicant a water wise landscaping permit in a form prescribed by the
Department.
   (B)   If, in the judgment of the Director, the project will not comply with
one or more applicable requirements of this code, the Director shall specify
the requirement(s) with which the project will not comply and shall deny the
application.
§ 17.06.080 TEMPORARY LIMITED EXEMPTION FROM SPECIFIED CODE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   From the date on which an application is approved by the Director
until the date on which the installation of the replacement landscaping will
begin, as stated in the application, the property owner shall not be subject to
citation by any city officer for violation of the following provisions of this
code, in the following respects only:
      (1)   Section 8.27.010(A), with respect to the prohibition on dry
vegetation;
      (2)   Section 8.27.010(B), with respect to the prohibition on dry grass
and stubble;
      (3)   Section
8.30.010(D), with respect to the prohibition on vegetation constituting an
unsightly appearance. This temporary exemption shall apply only to vegetation
that is unsightly due to lack of irrigation;
      (4)   Section
15.24.040(A)(2), with respect to the requirement that planted vegetation be
regularly irrigated; and
      (5)   Section
15.24.040(A)(2), with respect to the prohibition on dead vegetation.
   (B)   The exemptions provided for in this section shall apply only to the
portion of the property that is to be re-landscaped pursuant to the program.
The property owner must maintain the remaining portion of the property in
compliance with all applicable provisions of this code at all times.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. MC-1418, passed 11-5-2015 deleted Chapter 8.27 and directed that
references to it be directed to
Chapter 8.30 and also amended
Chapter 8.30; specific divisions referenced may either no longer exist or no
longer work as specific references although the content may still be found
elsewhere in
Chapter 8.30 as a whole.
§ 17.06.090 FIRE HAZARD PROHIBITED.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no property shall, at
any time, be maintained in such a manner as to constitute a fire hazard.
§ 17.06.100 YARD SIGN.
   (A)   Each participant in the program shall obtain from the Department and
prominently display on the property subject to the program a yard sign
indicating that the property is subject to the program, for the purpose of
informing city officers that the property is subject to the exemptions provided
for in this chapter.
   (B)   The yard sign shall be displayed, at all times, during which the
property is subject to the exemptions provided for in this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the program participant to promptly
replace a sign that is lost or stolen.
   (D)   Knowingly displaying a sign issued by the Department, pursuant to this
section, on property that is not covered by a properly issued water wise
landscaping permit is a violation of this code. Any person who violates or
causes the violation of this provision is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction, may be punished in accordance with §
1.12.010.
§ 17.06.110 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION.
   Upon the completion of the installation of replacement landscaping, pursuant
to the program, the owner of the property must sign and submit to the
Department a properly completed certificate of completion in a form prescribed
by the Department, attesting that the landscaping has been installed in
compliance with the approved program application. The certificate of completion
must be accompanied by full-color photographs taken from the front perimeter of
the property sufficient to illustrate that a water wise landscape has been
completed.
§ 17.06.120 FAILURE TO TIMELY COMPLETE INSTALLATION.
   A property owner who fails to complete installation of replacement
landscaping, pursuant to this chapter, by the next May 31, immediately
following the date on which the installation begins, forfeits the exemptions
provided for in §
17.06.080 and any other benefits to which program participants are entitled
under this chapter.
§ 17.06.130 WITHDRAWAL FROM PROGRAM.
   A property owner who obtains a permit but later elects not to continue
participation in the program may withdraw from the program by notifying the
Director, in writing, of the election to withdraw and paying a withdrawal fee
of $100 for each month the permit was in effect, prorated day-by-day for
partial months.
§ 17.06.140 FALSE STATEMENT IN REQUIRED DOCUMENTS.
   Making a knowingly false statement in any of the documents required for
participation in the program is a violation of this code. Any person who
violates or causes the violation of this provision is guilty of a misdemeanor,
and, upon conviction, may be punished in accordance with §
1.12.010.
§ 17.06.150 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable, and, if any sentence, section
or other part of this chapter should be found to be invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect the remaining provisions, which shall continue in full force
and effect.
§ 17.06.160 CEQA EXEMPTION.
   The adoption of this chapter is exempt from the provisions of the California
Environmental Quality Act, pursuant to § 15061(b)(3) of the Guidelines for
Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act (Title 14, Cal. Code
of Regulations, commencing with § 15000), as it can be seen with certainty that
there is no possibility that the activity permitted by this chapter may have a
significant effect on the environment.
(Ord. MC-1311, passed 8-18-2009)
Statutory reference:
   California Environmental Quality Act, see Cal. Public Resources Code, §§
21000 et seq.
CHAPTER 17.07: WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE
(Repealed by Ord. MC-1368, passed 1-9-2012)
CHAPTER 17.08: MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION ORDINANCE
Section
   
17.08.010   Title
   
17.08.020   Findings
   
17.08.030   Intent
   
17.08.040   Definitions
   
17.08.050   Administration of vehicle registration fee
   
17.08.060   Liberal construction
§ 17.08.010 TITLE.
   This chapter may be referred to as the “Mobile Source Air Pollution
Ordinance.”
(Ord. MC-784, passed 5-7-1991)
§ 17.08.020 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The city finds and declares that the following apply.
      (1)   The city is committed to improving the public health, safety and
welfare, including air quality.
      (2)   Mobile sources are a major contributor to air pollution in the
South Coast Air Basin.
      (3)   Air quality goals for the region established by state law cannot be
met without reducing air pollution from mobile sources.
      (4)   The South Coast Air Quality Management Plan (“AQMP”) calls upon
cities and counties to reduce emissions from motor vehicles consistent with the
requirements of the California Clean Air Act of 1988 by developing and
implementing mobile source air pollution reduction programs.
      (5)   To the extent that such programs place demands upon the city’s
funds, those programs should be financed by shifting the responsibility for
financing from the General Fund to the motor vehicles creating the demand, to
the greatest extent possible.
      (6)   Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 44223, added by action of the
California Legislature on September 30, 1990, (Stats. 1990, Ch. 1705),
authorizes the South Coast Air Quality Management District (“SCAQMD”) to impose
an additional motor vehicle registration fee of $2, commencing on April 1,
1991, increasing to $4, commencing on April 1, 1992, to finance the
implementation of transportation measures embodied in the AQMP and provisions
of the California Clean Air Act.
      (7)   Forty cents of every dollar collected under the Cal. Health and
Safety Code, § 44223 shall be distributed to cities and counties located in the
South Coast Air Quality Management District that comply with the Cal. Health
and Safety Code, § 44243, based on the jurisdiction’s prorated share of
population as defined by the State Department of Finance.
      (8)   The city is located within the South Coast Air Quality Management
District and is eligible to receive a portion of revenues from the motor
vehicle registration fees upon adoption of this chapter.
      (9)   The city, after careful consideration, finds and declares that the
imposition of the motor vehicle registration fee by the SCAQMD to finance
mobile source air pollution reduction programs is in the best interest of the
general welfare of the city and its residents.
   (B)   Therefore, the city deems it advisable to adopt this chapter.
(Ord. MC-784, passed 5-7-1991)
Statutory reference:
   California Clean Air Act of 1988, see Cal. Stats. of 1988, AB 2595
§ 17.08.030 INTENT.
   This chapter is intended to support the SCAQMD’s imposition of the vehicle
registration fee and to bring the city into compliance with the requirements
set forth in the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 44243 in order to receive fee
revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from
motor vehicles.
(Ord. MC-784, passed 5-7-1991)
§ 17.08.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of San Bernardino.
   FEE ADMINISTRATOR. The City Director of Finance and Management Services.
   MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION PROGRAMS. Any program or project
implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles pursuant to
the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Cal.
Health and Safety Code, Division 26, Part 3, Chapter 5.5, Article 5 (commencing
with § 40460).
(Ord. MC-784, passed 5-7-1991; Ord. MC-1625, passed 2-21-2024)
Statutory reference:
   California Clean Air Act of 1988, see Cal. Stats. of 1988, AB 2595
§ 17.08.050 ADMINISTRATION OF VEHICLE REGISTRATION FEE.
   (A)   Receipt of fee. Vehicle registration fees due, pursuant to this
chapter, disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the city shall be accepted by
the Fee Administrator.
   (B)   Transfer of funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the Fee
Administrator shall be responsible for placement of such funds into a separate
account as hereinafter specified.
   (C)   Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund. The Fee
Administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in
a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of city funds. Interest
earned by the account shall be credited to that account and shall be used to
finance mobile source air pollution programs.
   (D)   Audits. The city consents to audits, at least once every two years, of
all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues provided
under the Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 44223.
(Ord. MC-784, passed 5-7-1991)
§ 17.08.060 LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to effectively
carry out its purposes, which are found and declared to be in furtherance of
the public health, safety, welfare and convenience.
(Ord. MC-784, passed 5-7-1991)
TITLE 18: RESERVED
[Reserved]
TITLE 19: LAND USE/SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
[Reserved]
Editor’s note:
   The city’s land use/subdivision regulations (Prior Code, Chapters 19.02
through 19.74) are adopted by reference as if set out in full herein. Please
contact the city for the full regulations. Development Code: https://
sanbernardino.gov/659/Development-Code
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to California Codes
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO CALIFORNIA CODES
Business and Professions Code
Section Code Section
Section                                                 Code Section
5229 et seq.                                            Title 16
6730.2                                                  2.14.032
Division 3, Chapter 9 (commencing with 7000)            12.03.110
7582 et seq.                                            5.14.060
Division 5, Chapter 14, Article 12 (13530 et seq.)      5.64.030
16240                                                   3.64.060
17070 et seq.                                           3.46.210
17210                                                   8.24.095
19418(a)                                                5.10.060
19610.4                                                 5.72.010
20700 et seq.                                           Ch. 5.64
21500—21639                                           Ch. 5.56
Division 8, Chapter 9, Article 6(commencing with 21660) 5.30.020
22435.1                                                 5.26.020
22435.2                                                 5.26.060
22435.7(g)                                              5.26.040
22435.7(i)                                              5.26.030;
                                                        5.26.060
Division 10                                             5.10.050;
                                                        8.99.030
26000 et seq.                                           5.10.010;
                                                        5.10.050
26001(f)                                                8.97.020;
                                                        8.99.030
26050 et seq.                                           5.18.040
26055(h)                                                5.10.090
26057(b)(4)                                             5.10.070
26090(e)                                                5.10.030
26100 et seq.                                           5.10.350
 
 
Civil Code
Section Code Section
Section        Code Section
51             9.52.070;
               9.96.050
798 et seq.    8.90.030
798.3          8.79.470
798.15 et seq. 8.90.330
798.17         8.90.050
798.41         8.90.050;
               8.90.290
798.49         8.90.050
798.55 et seq. 8.90.330
798.56         8.90.050
799.29         8.90.040;
               9.95.010
1941 et seq.   15.27.050
2080           2.70.020
2080.1         2.70.020
2080.2         2.70.020
 
 
Code of Civil Procedure
Section Code Section
Section         Code Section
446             8.39.090
683.110—683.228.80.605
                2.45.040;
1094.5          8.24.110;
                8.90.320;
                9.95.050
                1.26.010;
                1.26.040;
                2.45.040;
                3.46.150;
                5.04.497;
                5.26.070;
                8.18.040;
                8.18.063;
1094.6          8.24.110;
                8.30.022;
                8.30.030;
                8.30.045;
                8.90.140;
                8.90.320;
                9.93.160;
                9.94.120;
                13.25.060
                9.92.080;
1094.6 et seq.  9.93.140;
                9.94.090
1094.8          5.14.120
1285—1287.6   8.80.605
1500 et seq.    Ch. 2.70
1822.50 et seq. 15.05.040
 
 
Elections Code
Section Code Section
Section       Code Section
1002          2.56.060;
              2.56.070
4000          2.03.010
4004          2.03.010
9280          2.56.080
10100 et seq. Ch. 2.56
12001         2.56.060;
              2.56.070
15651         2.01.010
 
 
Evidence Code
 
Section Code Section
603     9.32.015
604     9.32.015
 
 
Family Code
 
Section Code Section
6500    5.36.010
7002    9.68.030
 
 
Financial Code
 
Section                           Code Section
Division 3, commencing with 12000 9.60.030
21000—21209                     Ch. 5.56
 
 
Fish and Game Code
 
Section   Code Section
1 et seq. 12.76.045
 
 
Food and Agricultural Code
 
Section                                           Code Section
16301 et seq.                                     Title 6
17001 et seq.                                     6.01.150
29000 et seq.                                     Ch. 8.03
31622                                             6.09.050
Division 17, Chapter 10.5 (commencing with 47000) 5.30.020
81000                                             5.10.050
 
 
Government Code
Section Code Section
Section                                                           Code Section
Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3 (900 et seq.)                       3.16.050
Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3, Chapter 1                          3.16.010
900 et seq.                                                       3.12.030;
                                                                  Ch. 3.16
Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3, Chapter 2                          3.16.010
                                                                  3.16.030;
912.4                                                             3.44.130;
                                                                  3.46.140
913                                                               3.46.140
935                                                               3.44.130;
                                                                  3.46.140
945.6                                                             3.16.040;
                                                                  3.46.140
946                                                               3.16.040;
                                                                  3.46.140
Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 10.5                                 12.24.020
6061                                                              8.63.130
6066                                                              12.90.110;
                                                                  13.28.040
Title 1, Division 7, Chapter 1                                    8.15.020
6254                                                              3.46.070
6254(a)                                                           12.21.040
6254(c)                                                           8.50.010
6254(h)                                                           12.21.040
6254(k)                                                           12.21.040
6254.4                                                            14.08.16
6254.15                                                           12.21.040
6255                                                              12.21.040
6500 et seq.                                                      3.46.070
6704                                                              Ch. 2.54;
                                                                  2.54.010
7920.000 et seq.                                                  14.08.16
Title 1, Division 10, Part 2, Chapter 1, commencing with 7921.000 12.21.040
7922.000                                                          8.50.010;
                                                                  12.21.040
7922.540(a)                                                       8.50.010
7925.000                                                          3.46.070
7927.410                                                          14.08.16
7927.500                                                          12.21.040
7927.605                                                          12.21.040
7927.700                                                          8.50.010
7927.705                                                          8.50.010;
                                                                  12.21.040
7928.705                                                          12.21.040
8607                                                              2.46.070
8875.8                                                            15.12.200
8875.9                                                            15.12.200
11370 et seq.                                                     6.14.080
12650 et seq.                                                     3.46.210
20000 et seq.                                                     Ch. 2.48
25132                                                             8.19.040
25359                                                             1.20.010
29550                                                             3.80.040
29550 et seq.                                                     3.80.010;
                                                                  3.80.050
36512                                                             2.56.060;
                                                                  2.56.070
36900(b)                                                          8.80.602
37100.5                                                           5.18.020
37101                                                             5.18.020;
                                                                  Ch. 3.56
37202                                                             2.10.030
37208                                                             2.10.030
37209                                                             Ch. 2.10
38601                                                             Title 15
38660                                                             Title 15
                                                                  5.10.430;
38773.1                                                           8.18.067;
                                                                  8.30.056;
                                                                  8.99.050
                                                                  5.10.430;
38773.5                                                           8.36.150;
                                                                  8.99.050
38774                                                             Title 16
38775                                                             Ch. 12.44
38793                                                             Ch. 12.12;
                                                                  Ch. 13.36
38900                                                             Ch. 13.08
39501 et seq.                                                     Ch. 8.18
40805.5                                                           Ch. 2.10
43090                                                             3.40.020
Title 4, Division 4, Chapter 1, Article 2, 43090 et seq.          3.40.010
43093 et seq.                                                     Ch. 3.40
45345                                                             Ch. 2.48
50020—50022.9                                                   8.19.010
                                                                  Ch. 1.01;
50022.1—50022.8                                                 1.01.010;
                                                                  1.01.030
50022.1 et seq.                                                   Title 15
50022.6                                                           8.01.010
                                                                  Ch. 1.01;
50022.10                                                          1.01.010;
                                                                  1.01.030
51036—51039                                                     5.30.110;
                                                                  5.30.120
53054 et seq.                                                     14.08.21;
                                                                  14.08.23
53055.1                                                           14.08.23
53055.2                                                           14.08.23
                                                                  6.14.010;
                                                                  6.14.100;
                                                                  8.19.040;
53069.4                                                           8.24.110;
                                                                  8.80.602;
                                                                  9.92.010;
                                                                  9.92.180
53088 et seq.                                                     14.08.21;
                                                                  14.08.23
53088.2(p)                                                        14.08.23
53088.2(r)                                                        14.08.23
53750                                                             3.46.200
54202                                                             Ch. 3.04
54300                                                             12.84.730
                                                                  12.84.410;
54300 et seq.                                                     12.84.770—
                                                                  12.84.790
                                                                  12.84.410;
54354.5                                                           12.84.730;
                                                                  12.84.770
54739                                                             8.80.605
54740.5                                                           8.80.605
                                                                  2.27.040;
54950—54963                                                     2.58.010;
                                                                  2.62.010
54950 et seq.                                                     2.58.090
54950.5 et seq.                                                   2.17.060;
                                                                  2.45.060
54957.9                                                           2.58.070
65100 et seq.                                                     Ch. 2.22
65101                                                             Ch. 2.22
65302                                                             8.79.020;
                                                                  15.08.010
65560                                                             8.79.020
65800                                                             8.79.020
65850                                                             Title 16
65864 et seq.                                                     3.27.010
66000 et seq.                                                     3.27.075;
                                                                  15.73.010
66410 et seq.                                                     3.38.030
66426                                                             5.04.525
66427                                                             5.04.525
                                                                  3.27.070;
66477                                                             3.27.075;
                                                                  3.27.110
68097.2(b)                                                        9.95.040
68632(a)                                                          5.30.120
68632(b)                                                          5.30.120
83116                                                             2.55.020
84100 et seq.                                                     2.57.010
85301(d)                                                          2.55.030
Title 9, Chapter 7, Article 1 (commencing with 87100)             2.55.010
 
 
Health and Safety Code
Section Code Section
Section                                                      Code Section
480 et seq.                                                  8.01.010 
500 et seq.                                                  8.01.010 
1155.5                                                       8.01.010
1250                                                         8.24.095
1596.76                                                      5.10.050;
                                                             8.97.030
3194                                                         8.50.010
5400 et seq.                                                 Ch. 13.08
5410                                                         13.08.020
5410—5416                                                  13.08.020
Division 5, Part 3, Chapter 6, Article 4, 5470 et seq.       13.28.010
                                                             9.95.010;
11000 et seq.                                                9.98.020;
                                                             9.98.110
11007                                                        9.96.020
                                                             5.18.040;
11018                                                        8.97.020;
                                                             8.99.030
11018.1                                                      5.18.040
                                                             5.10.050;
11018.5                                                      8.97.030;
                                                             8.99.030
11053—11059                                                9.98.020
Chapter 6 (commencing with 11350)                            9.95.010
11353.1                                                      5.10.050;
                                                             8.97.030
                                                             9.98.020;
11357.5                                                      9.98.040;
                                                             9.98.110
11362.1                                                      8.99.030
11362.1 et seq.                                              5.10.010;
                                                             5.10.050
11362.2                                                      8.99.030
Division 10, Chapter 6, Article 2, 11362.5                   5.10.040
11362.5                                                      5.10.050
11362.5 et seq.                                              8.99.030
11362.7                                                      5.10.050
11362.7—11362.85                                           5.10.040
11362.7 et seq.                                              5.10.050;
                                                             8.99.030
11362.765                                                    8.99.030
11362.765(c)                                                 8.99.040
11362.775(a)                                                 5.10.060;
                                                             5.10.310
11375.5                                                      9.98.020
Chapter 6.5 (commencing with 11400)                          9.95.010
11401                                                        9.98.020;
                                                             9.98.110
11488 et seq.                                                2.70.060
11532                                                        9.95.010
11591                                                        5.82.050
11591.5                                                      5.82.050
12505                                                        8.61.020
12529                                                        8.60.010
12557                                                        8.61.030
12706                                                        8.61.030
13146.2                                                      15.25.040
13146.2(a)                                                   15.25.010
17910 et seq.                                                Title 15
17920.3                                                      15.27.050
17975                                                        15.27.050
17980                                                        8.18.062;
                                                             8.30.043
18000 et seq.                                                Ch. 15.55
18007                                                        8.79.470
18010                                                        8.79.470
18218                                                        8.90.040
18800—18806                                                8.90.050
25117.1                                                      17.05.020
25298                                                        8.01.010
Division 26, Part 3, Chapter 5.5, Article 5 (commencing with 17.08.040
40460)
44223                                                        17.08.020;
                                                             17.08.050
44243                                                        17.08.020;
                                                             17.08.030
101025 et seq.                                               8.01.010
Division 101, Part 3, Chapter 3                              3.28.010
101275 et seq.                                               8.01.010
101310                                                       8.01.010
101375 et seq.                                               8.01.010
101450 et seq.                                               8.01.010
104550                                                       8.73.010
109925                                                       5.10.050;
                                                             8.97.030
109935                                                       5.10.050;
                                                             8.97.030
Division 10, commencing with 11000                           8.83.010
113781                                                       8.24.095
113783                                                       8.24.095
113789                                                       8.24.095
113841                                                       8.24.095
113842                                                       8.24.095
120125 et seq.                                               8.01.010
121575—121635                                              6.11.010
121690                                                       6.08.010
 
 
Labor Code
Section Code Section
Section                                                 Code Section
1720 et seq.                                            12.24.030
1770                                                    12.24.030
1770 et seq.                                            8.90.190
Division 2, Part 9, Chapter 1, Article 1 (2260 et seq.) 5.80.200
Division 4                                              1.20.020
3200                                                    12.03.110
3200 et seq.                                            2.38.050
3201.5                                                  12.21.040
3800                                                    12.03.110
Division 5                                              1.20.020
6404.5                                                  8.97.040
 
 
Penal Code
Section Code Section
Section                                               Code Section
148.5                                                 9.16.010
186.22(e)                                             9.95.010
186.22(f)                                             9.95.010
243.3                                                 5.14.110
246                                                   Ch. 9.84
261                                                   5.14.110
261.5                                                 5.14.110
264.1                                                 5.14.110
266                                                   5.14.110
266a—266k                                           5.14.110
267                                                   5.14.110
286                                                   5.14.110
286.5                                                 5.14.110
287                                                   5.14.110
288                                                   5.14.110
                                                      5.14.110;
290                                                   5.19.050;
                                                      5.82.050
290 et seq.                                           5.19.030;
                                                      9.97.020
311—311.10                                          5.14.110
313                                                   9.70.010;
                                                      9.70.020
314                                                   5.14.110
315                                                   5.14.110
316                                                   5.14.110
319 et seq.                                           Ch. 9.44
326.3                                                 5.36.015;
                                                      5.36.065
326.3(u)(1)                                           5.36.010
326.3(w)(2)                                           5.36.065
326.4                                                 5.36.015;
                                                      5.36.065
326.5                                                 Ch. 5.36
326.5(l)(1)                                           5.36.050
326.5(l)(2)                                           5.36.050
330                                                   9.44.010;
                                                      9.44.020
330 et seq.                                           Ch. 9.44
330a                                                  9.44.010;
                                                      9.44.020
365                                                   9.52.060;
                                                      9.96.050
374                                                   Ch. 8.15
374.3                                                 Ch. 8.15
374.4                                                 Ch. 8.15
415                                                   9.52.070;
                                                      9.96.050
597                                                   6.12.010
597.5(a)                                              6.09.020
599aa                                                 6.09.020
602                                                   Ch. 9.52
602.5                                                 Ch. 9.52
                                                      5.14.110;
647                                                   8.50.010;
                                                      9.96.050
647(2)                                                9.52.070
647(a)                                                8.50.020
647(b)                                                8.50.020
830                                                   10.25.030
830.2(a)                                              9.90.010
830.2(c)                                              9.90.010
830.9                                                 9.90.010
830.32                                                9.90.010
830.32(b)                                             9.90.010
                                                      2.12.030;
836.5                                                 9.90.010;
                                                      10.48.090
836.5(a)                                              2.02.060
853.5                                                 2.02.060;
                                                      9.90.010
Part 2, Title 3, Chapter 5C                           8.18.030
Part 2, Title 3, Chapter 5C (commencing with 853.5)   6.01.130
Part 2, Title 3, Chapter 5D (commencing with 853.5)   6.01.130
853.6                                                 2.02.060;
                                                      9.90.010
Chapter 5C of Part 2, Title 3 (commencing with 853.6) 2.12.030
Chapter 5D of Part 2, Title 3 (commencing with 853.6) 2.12.030
Part 2, Title 3, Chapter 5C (853.6 et seq.)           10.48.090
1203.1                                                1.20.010
1412                                                  8.39.050
11105(b)(11)                                          5.10.310
12001 et seq.                                         Ch. 9.80
13300(b)(11)                                          5.10.310
Part 4, Title 4, Chapter 1                            2.36.010
Chapter 1, 13510(c)                                   2.36.020
Chapter 1, 13512                                      2.36.030
13520 et seq.                                         Ch. 2.36
Chapter 1, 13522                                      2.36.020
Chapter 1, 13525                                      2.36.020
16520                                                 8.65.070
18000                                                 8.65.050
19190                                                 8.65.010—
                                                      8.65.030
21310                                                 8.65.010—
                                                      8.65.030
21390                                                 8.65.010—
                                                      8.65.030
21590                                                 8.65.010—
                                                      8.65.030
29300                                                 8.65.010—
                                                      8.65.040
 
 
Public Contract Code
 
Section Code Section
20161   12.20.010;
        12.20.020
20163   12.20.010
20164   12.20.010
20166   12.20.010
20168   12.20.010
 
 
Public Resources Code
Section Code Section
Section                             Code Section
Division 2, Chapter 7.5             15.04.110
Division 3                          13.20.010
5181 et seq.                        Ch. 12.68
Division 6                          13.20.010
Division 13 (commencing with 21000) 5.10.090
21000 et seq.                       15.37.060;
                                    17.06.160
21050 et seq.                       8.01.010
Division 30 (commencing with 40000) 8.24.010
40191                               8.24.010
40201                               8.24.010
40507                               8.24.040
41781.3                             8.24.040
42800—42855                       8.24.080
42885                               8.24.080
 
 
Public Utilities Code
Section Code Section
Section                                  Code Section
799                                      3.46.170;
                                         3.46.220
Division 1, Part 1, Chapter 5, Article 2 5.24.170
Division 2.5, commencing with 5800       14.08.24
5800 et seq.                             14.08.04
6201 et seq.                             14.04.020
10001                                    3.75.010
21411                                    3.57.090
 
 
Revenue and Taxation Code
Section Code Section
Section                                              Code Section
107.6                                                12.05.080
327                                                  13.28.030
Division 1, Part 9, Chapter 5 (commencing with 5096) 3.48.110
Division 2, Part 1                                   3.57.070;
                                                     3.57.100
Division 2, Part I                                   3.56.040;
                                                     3.56.080
Division 2, Part 1 (commencing with 6001)            3.57.060
6066                                                 5.19.030
6067                                                 3.56.050;
                                                     3.57.080
6203                                                 3.56.080;
                                                     3.57.070
6366                                                 3.56.090;
                                                     3.57.090
6366.1                                               3.56.090;
                                                     3.57.090
                                                     3.56.040;
6701                                                 3.56.080;
                                                     3.57.070
                                                     3.56.040;
6702                                                 3.56.080;
                                                     3.57.070
                                                     3.56.040;
6711                                                 3.56.080;
                                                     3.57.070
                                                     3.56.040;
6715                                                 3.56.080;
                                                     3.57.070
                                                     3.56.040;
6737                                                 3.56.080;
                                                     3.57.070
                                                     3.56.040;
6797                                                 3.56.080;
                                                     3.57.070
                                                     3.56.040;
6828                                                 3.56.080;
                                                     3.57.070
                                                     3.56.020;
                                                     3.56.040;
Division 2, Part 1.5                                 3.56.080;
                                                     3.56.090;
                                                     3.56.100;
                                                     3.56.110
7200 et seq.                                         Ch. 3.56
                                                     3.57.010;
                                                     3.57.060;
Division 2, Part 1.6                                 3.57.090;
                                                     3.57.100;
                                                     3.57.110
Division 2, Part 1.6 (commencing with 7251)          3.57.010
Division 2, Part 1.7                                 3.57.100
7280                                                 Ch. 3.55
7281                                                 Ch. 3.55
7284.6                                               3.46.070;
                                                     3.46.130
7284.7                                               3.46.130
Division 2, Part 1.7, 7285.9                         3.57.010
10701—11053                                        5.24.010
Division 2, Part 6.7                                 3.48.100
Division 2, Part 6.7 (commencing with 11901)         3.48.010
11901 et seq.                                        Ch. 3.48
17056                                                3.44.140
17057                                                3.44.140
23701                                                5.36.010
23701a                                               5.36.010
23701b                                               5.36.010
23701d                                               5.36.010;
                                                     5.36.080
23701e                                               5.36.010
23701f                                               5.36.010
23701g                                               5.36.010
30001 et seq.                                        3.56.110;
                                                     Ch. 3.60
 
 
Streets and Highways Code
Section Code Section
Section                                     Code Section
Division 1, Chapter 1, Article 5            3.20.010;
                                            3.20.030
186.3                                       Ch. 3.20
1468                                        12.03.110
2106                                        Ch. 3.20
2107                                        Ch. 3.20
2113                                        Ch. 3.20
Division 4                                  12.28.010
                                            12.84.060;
                                            12.84.080;
Division 4, 2800 et seq.                    12.84.090;
                                            12.84.120;
                                            12.84.130;
                                            12.90.040
3110                                        12.90.040
3114                                        12.90.110
3115                                        12.90.110
5000 et seq.                                Ch. 12.28;
                                            12.28.030
Division 7, being 5000 et seq.              12.94.010
5003—5024                                 12.90.030
5101                                        12.94.010
5193                                        12.90.040
5195                                        12.90.040
5300—5325                                 12.84.210;
                                            12.90.110
Division 7, Part 3, Chapter 22              12.92.020
Division 7, Part 3, Chapter 24              12.92.020
Division 7, Part 3, Chapter 27              12.92.020
5896.1 et seq.                              Ch. 12.12;
                                            Ch. 13.36
Division 10, being 8500 et seq.             12.94.010
8570                                        12.94.010
                                            12.84.360;
8680—8688                                 12.84.410;
                                            12.84.730
                                            12.84.410;
8800—8809                                 12.84.730;
                                            12.90.080
                                            12.84.360;
8830—8837                                 12.84.410;
                                            12.84.730
Division 12, 10000 et seq.                  12.94.010
10100                                       12.94.010
10350—10358                               12.90.130
10404(a)                                    12.90.110
10404(b)                                    12.90.110
10404(c)                                    12.90.110
22000 et seq.                               Ch. 12.40
22531                                       12.90.030
Division 18, Part 1 (commencing with 31500) 12.84.330;
                                            12.84.350
Part 2 (commencing with 32500)              12.84.750
                                            12.84.380;
35100 et seq.                               12.84.410;
                                            12.84.440
 
 
Vehicle Code
Section Code Section
Section                                       Code Section
100 et seq.                                   Ch. 10.04
463                                           10.25.030
670                                           10.25.030
2500 et seq.                                  Ch. 5.76
2800                                          10.24.220
4000                                          8.30.015
Division 3, Chapter 1 (commencing with 4000)  3.57.090
5004                                          8.36.130
5202                                          8.30.015
Division 3.5 (commencing with 9840)           3.57.090
Division 5, Chapter 3 (commencing with 11500) 5.28.010
11520                                         5.28.010
16500                                         5.76.150
16500 et seq.                                 Ch. 5.24;
                                              Ch. 5.76
16501                                         Ch. 5.24;
                                              Ch. 5.76
                                              Ch. 5.24;
21100                                         Ch. 5.76;
                                              Ch. 10.08;
                                              Ch. 12.56
21100 et seq.                                 Ch. 10.16
21101                                         Ch. 10.20
21101.2                                       10.24.220
21106                                         Ch. 10.28;
                                              Ch. 10.36
21112                                         Ch. 5.24;
                                              Ch. 5.76
21114.5                                       10.16.020
21206                                         Ch. 10.24
21351 et seq.                                 Ch. 10.12
21450 et seq.                                 Ch. 10.12
21458                                         Ch. 10.16;
                                              Ch. 10.36
21961                                         Ch. 10.28
                                              10.52.010—
22357                                         10.52.050;
                                              10.52.070
                                              10.52.010—
22358                                         10.52.050;
                                              10.52.070
                                              10.52.010—
22360                                         10.52.050;
                                              10.52.070
22500 et seq.                                 Ch. 10.16
22507.5(c)                                    10.16.120
22520.5                                       9.62.060
22523                                         10.16.230
22650 et seq.                                 Ch. 8.36
22651                                         10.16.020;
                                              10.16.150
22651(n)                                      10.16.120
22651.7                                       10.16.150
22651.9                                       10.25.020;
                                              10.25.050
22652                                         Ch. 10.16
22660—22664                                 8.36.010
22852                                         10.25.020;
                                              10.25.060
24002                                         8.30.015
27200—27207                                 Ch. 10.56;
                                              10.56.010
35701                                         10.24.190
35701 et seq.                                 10.24.190
35703 et seq.                                 10.24.190
35790                                         8.90.040
Division 16.7                                 10.48.030
39000 et seq.                                 Ch. 10.48
40001                                         8.30.015
                                              10.16.150;
Vehicle Code, 40202                           10.16.240—
                                              10.16.260;
                                              10.16.280
Division 18, Chapter 2, 42200                 3.24.010;
                                              3.24.020
 
 
Welfare and Institutions Code
 
Section      Code Section
625.5        9.68.060
625.5(d)     9.68.060
625.5(e)     9.68.060
9400 et seq. 5.52.010
 
 
Water Code
 
Section    Code Section
Division 7 8.80.103
13050(d)   8.80.207
13050(k)   8.80.103
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
442      8-15-10     8.48.010—
                     8.48.030
465      9-5-11      8.51.010;
                     8.51.020
638      8-22-16     5.56.070—
                     5.56.090
625      12-21-16    8.09.010;
                     8.09.020
102      11-17-1891  12.32.010—
                     12.32.040
106      1-26-1892   8.87.010;
                     8.87.020
111      5-17-1892   12.48.020—
                     12.48.050
120      9-13-1892   12.44.030
122      9-27-1892   12.48.010
151      1-16-1894   12.44.040—
                     12.44.080
294      11-17-1903  8.06.010;
                     8.06.020
295      12-15-1903  12.68.010—
                     12.68.030
335      10-10-1906  12.12.010—
                     12.12.050
347      1-12-1907   2.12.010—
                     2.12.050
404      12-7-1908   5.56.010—
                     5.56.050
421      9-13-1909   8.03.010—
                     8.03.030
475      2-13-1912   12.44.090—
                     12.44.120
536      11-4-1913   9.44.010—
                     9.44.030
541      11-10-1913  14.04.010—
                     14.04.040
562      4-6-1914    12.52.020—
                     12.52.040
614      11-1-1915   12.60.010;
                     12.60.020
677      6-1-1917    13.04.010—
                     13.04.030
756      1-4-1920    12.36.010
                     5.04.005—
                     5.04.030;
                     5.04.055—
                     5.04.110;
                     5.04.125;
                     5.04.140;
                     5.04.150;
                     5.04.155;
763      3-2-1920    5.04.160;
                     5.04.195;
                     5.04.210;
                     5.04.245;
                     5.20.010—
                     5.20.160;
                     5.24.010;
                     5.24.020;
                     5.24.150—
                     5.24.170
                     1.24.010;
                     2.02.090;
                     2.66.010;
                     3.16.010—
                     3.16.040;
                     5.28.010;
                     5.64.010—
                     5.64.030;
                     6.01.030—
                     6.01.050;
                     6.01.070—
                     6.01.130;
                     6.03.010;
                     6.03.020;
                     6.03.030;
                     6.03.040;
                     6.04.010—
                     6.04.050;
                     6.04.070;
                     6.04.080;
                     6.05.020—
                     6.05.040;
                     6.08.020;
                     6.08.040—
                     6.08.060;
821      8-9-1921    6.08.080—
                     6.08.110;
                     6.08.130;
                     6.11.010;
                     8.84.010;
                     8.84.020;
                     9.08.010—
                     9.08.030;
                     9.12.010;
                     9.12.030;
                     9.12.040;
                     9.48.010—
                     9.48.030;
                     9.52.070;
                     9.56.010;
                     9.84.010;
                     10.56.010;
                     10.56.020;
                     12.20.010—
                     12.20.030;
                     12.36.020;
                     12.44.010;
                     12.44.020;
                     12.52.010;
                     16.16.010—
                     16.16.050;
                     16.16.070
858      4-11-1922   3.36.010—
                     3.36.030
1003     11-14-1923  6.03.010
1263     12-8-1925   12.52.010
1301     5-12-1926   12.36.020
1482     10-20-1931  6.08.060
1489     3-8-1932    5.04.140;
                     5.04.155
1492     6-21-1932   9.64.010—
                     9.64.030
1525     1-8-1934    5.04.090
1530     7-3-1934    9.08.010—
                     9.08.030
1547     6-11-1935   3.20.010—
                     3.20.030
1554     10-22-1935  9.32.010—
                     9.32.060
1557     1-28-1936   3.20.010—
                     3.20.030
1613     7-19-1938   5.56.040;
                     5.56.050
1645     8-20-1940   9.52.010—
                     9.52.050
                     10.04.010;
                     10.04.020;
                     10.04.030;
                     10.04.060;
                     10.04.080;
                     10.04.090;
                     10.04.100—
                     10.04.180;
                     10.08.010;
                     10.08.020;
                     10.12.010—
                     10.12.050;
                     10.16.010—
                     10.16.150;
                     10.16.170;
                     10.16.190;
                     10.16.200;
1652     3-18-1941   10.20.010—
                     10.20.030;
                     10.24.010—
                     10.24.060;
                     10.24.090;
                     10.24.100;
                     10.24.120—
                     10.24.200;
                     10.28.010;
                     10.28.020;
                     10.28.040;
                     10.28.050;
                     10.32.030—
                     10.32.060;
                     10.36.010;
                     10.36.020;
                     10.40.010;
                     10.40.020;
                     10.44.010
1655     4-8-1941    12.40.010—
                     12.40.130
1657     4-22-1941   9.28.010—
                     9.28.040
1706     12-21-1943  10.12.020
1713     - -1944     2.12.010;
                     2.12.020
1729     11-30-1944  5.04.125;
                     5.04.195
1730     1-3-1945    10.36.010
1734     2-6-1945    2.48.010;
                     2.48.020
1739     4-12-1945   12.72.010—
                     12.72.050
1755     3-27-1946   10.16.110
                     12.76.010—
1761     5-25-1946   12.76.040;
                     12.76.050
                     8.87.030;
1785     4-8-1947    8.87.040;
                     8.87.060
1800     9-22-1947   5.04.160;
                     5.04.245
1811     10-7-1947   2.54.010
1815     2-27-1948   2.22.010;
                     2.22.020
1816     3-9-1948    3.24.010;
                     3.24.020
1825     4-27-1948   3.28.010;
                     3.28.020
1851     4-5-1949    5.04.210
1872     12-6-1949   2.28.010;
                     2.28.020
1900     11-30-1950  12.36.030;
                     12.36.030
1915     5-22-1951   9.68.010;
                     9.68.060
1918     7-2-1951    2.66.010
1925     11-6-1951   8.54.010—
                     8.54.040
1885     5-2-1952    12.40.140
1949     7-22-1952   10.12.040;
                     10.28.040
1950     7-22-1952   10.48.010—
                     10.48.110
1951     7-22-1952   5.56.030
1963     11-18-1952  12.28.060—
                     12.28.110
                     5.76.010—
                     5.76.050;
                     5.76.070—
1987     7-7-1953    5.76.450;
                     5.76.500—
                     5.76.530;
                     5.76.580
                     8.63.010—
1988     7-21-1953   8.63.100;
                     8.63.120—
                     8.63.140
2003     11-17-1953  9.16.010;
                     9.16.020
2005     11-24-1953  8.66.010—
                     8.66.080
2014     1-19-1954   15.36.010
2040     8-3-1954    12.16.010;
                     12.16.020
2048     10-5-1954   2.56.010—
                     2.56.080
2063     5-17-1955   12.28.010—
                     12.28.050
2075     9-21-1955   10.16.120
                     5.76.170;
                     5.76.230;
                     5.76.240;
2078     11-8-1955   5.76.260;
                     5.76.350;
                     5.76.360;
                     5.76.510
2096     2-21-1956   8.57.010—
                     8.57.090
2100     3-6-1956    5.52.010—
                     5.52.100
2102     4-3-1956    8.54.020
2105     4-3-1956    10.52.010—
                     10.52.060
2118     5-31-1956   3.56.010—
                     3.56.110
2121     6-19-1956   2.70.010—
                     2.70.050
2135     8-21-1956   2.52.010
                     5.76.280;
2154     1-22-1957   5.76.310;
                     5.76.370
2158     2-11-1957   13.08.010;
                     13.08.020
2162     2-19-1957   14.04.020
2163     2-19-1957   12.32.050;
                     12.32.070
2168     5-7-1957    13.12.010—
                     13.12.040
2171     5-13-1957   6.08.110
2192     10-22-1957  8.63.020
2227     7-1-1958    5.04.150
2247     11-12-1958  5.04.030
2265     6-23-1959   12.36.030
                     12.40.070;
2273     9-22-1959   12.40.120;
                     12.40.130
2284     2-24-1960   2.58.010
2288     3-8-1960    10.28.050
                     15.28.010;
2291     3-29-1960   15.28.020;
                     15.28.140—
                     15.28.170
2347     3-27-1961   12.44.040
2367     7-5-1961    5.76.430;
                     5.76.440
2374     7-24-1961   3.32.010;
                     3.32.020
2386     9-5-1961    12.24.010;
                     12.24.020
2392     9-26-1961   10.04.150;
                     10.52.060
2397     11-21-1961  2.02.010—
                     2.02.080
2398     9-21-1961   2.06.010;
                     2.06.020
2400     11-28-1961  2.36.010;
                     2.36.020
2403     12-11-1961  10.16.130
2406     12-19-1961  3.56.030;
                     3.56.080
2417     2-14-1962   8.84.010;
                     8.84.020
                     2.56.050;
2429     3-27-1962   2.56.060;
                     2.56.080
2431     4-2-1962    15.48.010—
                     15.48.100
2449     7-24-1962   2.50.010;
                     2.50.020
2455     8-13-1962   5.28.010
2457     8-24-1962   5.56.010
2481     1-29-1963   2.04.010
2498     5-14-1963   8.66.020
2508     7-2-1963    3.36.030
2510     7-16-1963   8.66.030
2519     8-20-1963   12.28.060
2537     11-19-1963  10.16.110
2552     1-28-1964   9.28.010—
                     9.28.040
2561     3-3-1964    6.08.080;
                     6.08.100
2579     5-26-1964   10.24.170;
                     10.24.180
                     3.04.010—
2588     6-23-1964   3.04.100;
                     5.32.010—
                     5.32.110
2592     7-7-1964    3.56.020
2598     7-25-1964   5.32.030
2613     9-29-1964   10.16.140
                     2.64.010—
2622     11-17-1964  2.64.050;
                     2.64.070
2643     2-2-1965    9.44.010;
                     9.44.020
2654     3-9-1965    3.12.030
2664     4-13-1965   9.16.010
2673     6-27-1965   1.12.010;
                     1.12.020
2690     10-5-1965   10.04.060
2700     11-2-1965   12.76.030
                     3.64.010;
2711     12-14-1965  3.64.020;
                     3.64.050
2730     3-15-1966   3.64.020
                     8.15.010—
2732     4-5-1966    8.15.120;
                     8.15.140—
                     8.15.170
2733     4-5-1966    5.76.160
2743     5-17-1966   3.32.010;
                     3.32.020
2747     5-24-1966   8.15.020
2754     6-3-1966    10.16.150
2768     8-23-1966   10.16.040
2779     11-8-1966   2.56.030
2784     11-29-1966  15.36.010
2802     3-14-1967   16.16.010—
                     16.16.050
2809     3-28-1967   5.04.065
2811     4-11-1967   3.55.180
2812     4-18-1967   2.22.020
2828     6-27-1967   2.38.010—
                     2.38.120
2836     8-15-1967   2.02.010
2844     8-29-1967   12.76.010
                     2.10.010;
2855     10-3-1967   2.10.020;
                     2.10.040
2856     10-3-1967   10.12.030
2867     11-28-1967  3.48.010—
                     3.48.110
                     8.60.010—
                     8.60.050;
2884     2-6-1968    8.60.070—
                     8.60.110;
                     8.60.130;
                     8.60.150
                     5.80.010—
2900     4-23-1968   5.80.030;
                     5.80.050—
                     5.80.220
2915     6-25-1968   10.24.190
2917     6-25-1968   10.24.170
2919     7-2-1968    13.36.010—
                     13.36.120
2926     7-30-1968   6.08.020
                     3.44.010;
                     3.44.020;
2931     8-13-1968   3.44.050—
                     3.44.130;
                     3.44.135;
                     3.44.150
2934     8-20-1968   2.62.010;
                     2.62.020
2939     9-11-1968   9.84.010
2968     1-21-1969   6.11.010
                     8.30.070;
2969     1-21-1969   8.36.020—
                     8.36.150
                     5.76.030;
2979     3-18-1969   5.76.350;
                     5.76.520;
                     5.76.530
2997     7-1-1969    12.44.110
                     5.76.130;
3002     7-15-1969   5.76.150;
                     5.76.340
3007     8-19-1969   13.12.010—
                     13.12.030
                     12.40.010—
3016     9-23-1969   12.40.060;
                     12.40.100
                     5.76.040;
                     5.76.050;
                     5.76.070;
                     5.76.080;
3022     10-21-1969  5.76.220;
                     5.76.320;
                     5.76.340;
                     5.76.390;
                     5.76.420
                     15.48.030;
3031     12-9-1969   15.48.050—
                     15.48.070
3035     12-16-1969  10.44.010
3038     12-23-1969  9.12.010;
                     9.12.030
3064     4-7-1970    15.68.010—
                     15.68.050
3070     5-12-1970   5.80.140;
                     5.80.150
3074     6-2-1970    2.50.010
3086     6-30-1970   10.56.010;
                     10.56.020
3095     8-11-1970   9.56.010
3120     11-10-1970  2.02.030
3126     12-1-1970   2.22.020
3150     3-2-1971    2.50.010
3155     3-9-1971    8.63.090;
                     8.63.130
3185     7-13-1971   6.08.090
3212     11-16-1971  3.64.050
3216     12-21-1971  2.22.010
3217     12-21-1971  13.36.100
3220     12-21-1971  8.78.010—
                     8.78.030
3222     1-4-1972    1.16.010
3224     1-4-1972    12.20.020
3226     1-4-1972    2.50.010
3227     1-4-1972    15.28.140—
                     15.28.170
3233     1-18-1972   10.04.010;
                     10.04.100
3236     2-25-1972   8.60.050
3245     3-8-1972    5.04.060
3265     5-5-1972    9.32.040
3267     5-17-1972   8.36.100
3268     5-17-1972   5.04.070
3271     6-28-1972   2.56.040
3273     7-14-1972   2.70.020;
                     2.70.030
3275     7-14-1972   12.20.010
3285     8-24-1972   2.10.040
3286     8-24-1972   2.02.050
3292     9-25-1972   3.64.010;
                     3.64.040
3293     9-25-1972   3.64.030
3300     10-24-1972  8.57.040
3301     10-24-1972  6.01.130
3306     10-24-1972  2.56.070
3307     11-9-1972   6.08.060
3313     12-7-1972   2.50.010
3315     12-7-1972   10.16.020
                     12.80.010—
3326     1-3-1973    12.80.050;
                     12.80.130;
                     12.80.140
                     10.16.010;
3328     1-17-1973   10.16.020;
                     10.16.050—
                     10.16.070
3329     2-16-1973   10.24.200
3330     2-16-1973   1.20.010;
                     1.20.020
                     6.01.030—
3334     2-28-1973   6.01.050;
                     6.01.070—
                     6.01.120
3346     5-11-1973   12.32.050
3354     6-8-1973    3.48.090
3363     8-9-1973    2.50.010
3365     8-9-1973    10.52.030;
                     10.52.050
                     8.18.010—
                     8.18.060;
3367     8-22-1973   8.18.070;
                     8.18.080;
                     8.18.090
3370     8-22-1973   3.04.100
                     3.56.050;
3378     10-4-1973   3.56.060;
                     3.56.090
3383     10-17-1973  2.62.020
3406     3-4-1974    5.76.200
3407     3-6-1974    13.08.010
3412     3-19-1974   5.76.200
3414     4-4-1974    5.64.010—
                     5.64.030
3419     4-19-1974   8.36.080—
                     8.36.120
3426     5-20-1974   2.10.020
3432     6-17-1974   12.28.080;
                     12.28.090
3433     6-24-1974   3.55.180
3448     10-30-1974  2.56.010
3452     10-30-1974  6.08.050;
                     6.08.130
3455     11-5-1974   12.68.010;
                     12.68.020
3462     12-10-1974  3.08.010
                     6.03.020—
                     6.03.040;
                     6.04.010—
                     6.04.050;
3465     12-17-1974  6.04.070;
                     6.04.080;
                     6.05.020—
                     6.05.040;
                     6.08.110;
                     9.52.070
3470     12-17-1974  5.44.010—
                     5.44.120
3472     1-8-1975    2.08.010
3474     1-22-1975   15.48.080
3481     3-12-1975   15.28.010;
                     15.28.020
                     5.76.020;
3486     3-19-1975   5.76.030;
                     5.76.530
3488     3-19-1975   10.48.010—
                     10.48.110
3495     4-24-1975   5.20.010—
                     5.20.160
3497     5-16-1975   10.16.150
3505     6-17-1975   3.44.135
3510     6-27-1975   3.44.050;
                     3.44.060
3512     7-15-1975   2.14.040
3514     8-6-1975    3.04.070
3518     8-19-1975   8.18.020
3519     8-19-1975   10.16.120
3520     8-19-1975   9.12.040
3525     9-10-1975   12.80.050
3526     9-10-1975   2.50.010
                     3.56.020;
3529     9-16-1975   3.56.030;
                     3.56.070
3531     10-7-1975   3.04.080;
                     3.04.100
                     13.28.010;
3533     10-28-1975  13.28.020;
                     13.28.030—
                     13.28.120
3538     10-28-1975  10.24.200
3541     11-26-1975  2.52.010
3542     12-11-1975  5.44.010—
                     5.44.120
3551     2-4-1976    2.50.010
3554     2-18-1976   10.24.090
3555     2-18-1976   10.16.150
3556     2-18-1976   2.28.010
3562     3-17-1976   5.44.010
3577     6-7-1976    6.08.040
3581     6-21-1976   5.04.075
3582     6-21-1976   6.04.030
                     5.76.020;
3584     7-6-1976    5.76.350;
                     5.76.500;
                     5.76.510
                     5.76.090;
                     5.76.200;
                     5.76.210;
3585     7-6-1976    5.76.280;
                     5.76.290;
                     5.76.320;
                     5.76.340
3589     7-6-1976    12.84.010—
                     12.84.790
3593     8-2-1976    15.28.150
3594     8-3-1976    5.04.025
                     2.56.010;
3601     9-7-1976    2.56.020;
                     2.56.080
                     12.84.220;
                     12.84.230;
3603     9-20-1976   12.84.310;
                     12.84.320;
                     12.84.730
3606     10-26-1976  5.36.010—
                     5.36.200
3611     12-20-1976  8.63.130
3613     12-20-1976  6.08.020
                     5.24.010;
3627     2-24-1977   5.24.020;
                     5.24.150—
                     5.24.170
3628     2-24-1977   15.36.010
3638     4-20-1977   2.58.020
3641     5-25-1977   3.36.010
3643     5-25-1977   12.80.130
3651     6-29-1977   3.08.020
3652     7-15-1977   2.58.010
3653     7-15-1977   8.73.040
3658     7-18-1977   10.12.010
3665     9-2-1977    2.28.010
3671     9-2-1977    10.52.020
3672     9-16-1977   10.52.020
3675     9-21-1977   8.69.010
3676     10-4-1977   2.50.010
                     5.36.010;
                     5.36.020;
                     5.36.040;
3684     11-9-1977   5.36.060;
                     5.36.080;
                     5.36.100;
                     5.36.140
                     8.36.020;
                     8.36.030;
                     8.36.050;
3685     11-9-1977   8.30.070;
                     8.36.090;
                     8.36.130;
                     8.36.140
3688     11-9-1977   2.28.010
3698     12-21-1977  12.68.020
                     8.18.010;
3701     1-24-1978   8.18.030—
                     8.18.050
3703     2-9-1978    8.15.170
3704     2-9-1978    12.88.010;
                     12.88.020
3708     3-2-1978    2.28.010
3711     3-7-1978    12.44.030
3717     4-19-1978   10.52.010
3718     4-19-1978   10.24.190
3723     5-4-1978    3.04.070
3724     5-4-1978    5.36.050
3732     6-16-1978   2.28.010
3733     6-28-1978   10.16.150;
                     10.24.170
3736     7-5-1978    10.16.020
3750     8-21-1978   5.76.200
3743     8-25-1978   10.16.170
3746     8-25-1978   10.52.020
3751     8-25-1978   1.08.010—
                     1.08.090
3759     9-13-1978   12.84.300
3770     10-6-1978   2.68.010—
                     2.68.030
3772     11-9-1978   9.04.010—
                     9.04.040
3774     11-9-1978   12.28.110
3784     11-22-1978  10.52.010
3792     12-20-1978  2.56.030
                     10.48.010;
3795     1-9-1979    10.48.030;
                     10.48.040
                     3.44.050—
3796     1-9-1979    3.44.080;
                     3.44.100—
                     3.44.130
3803     2-8-1979    6.08.090
                     16.16.010;
3804     2-8-1979    16.16.020;
                     16.16.040;
                     16.16.070
3817     5-9-1979    10.16.120
3827     5-22-1979   6.08.090
3835     6-19-1979   13.08.020
3837     6-19-1979   10.16.010
3838     6-19-1979   8.18.040;
                     8.18.050
3842     7-11-1979   2.06.020
3843     7-11-1979   1.04.010—
                     1.04.090
3844     7-11-1979   10.16.150
3845     7-11-1979   10.16.010
3846     7-11-1979   3.55.180
                     3.48.050;
3848     7-11-1979   3.48.060;
                     3.48.090
3849     7-25-1979   10.52.020
3854     8-21-1979   10.52.020;
                     10.52.030
                     10.16.150;
3855     8-21-1979   10.16.170;
                     10.16.190
3858     8-21-1979   9.48.010—
                     9.48.030
3861     9-12-1979   3.44.135
3867     9-18-1979   9.32.010;
                     9.32.015
3868     9-18-1979   12.68.020
3869     9-18-1979   8.63.130
3874     10-16-1979  10.52.030
3877     11-7-1979   5.76.280;
                     5.76.290
3878     11-7-1979   5.76.500
                     10.16.110;
                     10.16.140;
3880     11-20-1979  10.16.170;
                     10.16.190;
                     10.16.200
3883     11-20-1979  2.02.090
3887     12-6-1979   5.04.030
3893     1-9-1980    3.04.070;
                     3.04.080
3896     1-9-1980    9.20.010;
                     9.20.020
3904     1-24-1980   3.40.010;
                     3.40.020
3918     2-25-1980   12.28.060;
                     12.28.080
3920     2-25-1980   9.12.040
3921     2-25-1980   2.52.010
3926     4-14-1980   6.01.130
3934     5-12-1980   14.08.27
3937     5-12-1980   6.08.040
                     5.76.020;
3943     6-3-1980    5.76.140;
                     5.76.500
3949     7-9-1980    5.04.071
3950     7-9-1980    12.44.030
3952     7-22-1980   14.08.27
3955     8-8-1980    3.10.010
3959     8-8-1980    10.52.020;
                     10.52.030
3960     8-20-1980   10.16.120
3965     9-10-1980   6.08.090
3966     9-10-1980   10.52.020
3968     9-23-1980   6.01.130
3971     9-24-1980   15.48.030;
                     15.48.040
3976     10-8-1980   5.36.010;
                     5.36.080
3981     10-29-1980  1.01.010—
                     1.01.100
MC-15    12-9-1980   2.28.010
MC-16    12-9-1980   5.76.150
MC-21    1-7-1981    6.01.150
MC-26    1-20-1981   5.72.010;
                     5.72.020
MC-28    2-3-1981    8.63.110
MC-36    3-25-1981   1.01.040
MC-42    4-8-1981    10.16.170
MC-46    4-27-1981   5.80.040
MC-47    4-27-1981   2.72.010
                     6.08.040;
MC-50    5-7-1981    6.08.090;
                     6.08.130
MC-64    6-19-1981   2.74.010—
                     2.74.040
MC-65    6-19-1981   Ch. 9.40;
                     10.24.070
MC-80    7-8-1981    10.24.190
MC-81    7-8-1981    10.52.020
MC-84    7-21-1981   Ch. 15.64
MC-85    8-4-1981    1.26.010;
                     1.26.020
MC-88    8-4-1981    6.08.090
MC-92    8-18-1981   Ch. 16.04;
                     Ch. 16.08
MC-93    9-2-1981    10.52.010—
                     10.52.050
MC-98    9-15-1981   2.58.010
MC-106   10-7-1981   2.28.030
MC-114   11-16-1981  10.52.030
MC-118   11-16-1981  5.04.030;
                     5.20.150
MC-119   11-16-1981  5.76.060
                     8.81.010;
                     8.81.030—
MC-125   1-7-1982    8.81.080;
                     8.81.100—
                     8.81.160
MC-126   1-7-1982    3.38.010—
                     3.38.050
MC-127   1-7-1982    2.22.020
MC-130   1-7-1982    5.44.020
MC-144   3-16-1982   16.16.040
MC-145   3-16-1982   6.01.150;
                     6.08.090
                     5.36.010;
                     5.36.020;
MC-146   3-16-1982   5.36.040;
                     5.36.060;
                     5.36.080
MC-149   4-7-1982    12.94.010—
                     12.94.030
                     12.90.010;
MC-150   4-7-1982    12.90.020—
                     12.90.130
MC-153   4-20-1982   8.36.030
MC-155   4-20-1982   3.38.040
MC-161   5-5-1982    10.28.030
MC-165   5-5-1982    Ch. 9.36
MC-170   6-8-1982    10.52.020
MC-175   6-28-1982   2.28.010
MC-174   6-29-1982   2.28.040
MC-177   7-7-1982    15.28.140;
                     15.28.150
MC-178   7-7-1982    8.18.060;
                     8.18.070
MC-183   7-7-1982    3.04.070;
                     3.04.080
MC-184   7-7-1982    2.58.020
MC-190   7-13-1982   5.76.500
                     5.44.020—
                     5.44.030;
MC-192   7-22-1982   5.44.070—
                     5.44.086;
                     5.44.100;
                     5.44.130
MC-194   8-3-1982    5.04.030
MC-195   8-3-1982    5.76.500
MC-198   8-11-1982   2.04.010;
                     2.04.030
MC-199   8-17-1982   10.52.020;
                     10.52.030
                     8.81.010;
                     8.81.070;
                     8.81.080;
MC-201   8-17-1982   8.81.100;
                     8.81.110;
                     8.81.150;
                     8.81.160
MC-207   9-20-1982   9.32.040
MC-209   9-20-1982   8.50.010—
                     8.50.060
MC-210   9-20-1982   10.04.050;
                     10.24.110
MC-216   10-25-1982  1.26.010—
                     1.26.040
MC-217   11-2-1982   6.05.020;
                     6.05.030
                     8.60.010;
MC-219   11-2-1982   8.60.050;
                     8.60.060
MC-228   12-7-1982   15.28.140
                     13.28.010;
MC-229   12-21-1982  13.28.020;
                     13.28.030;
                     13.28.060
MC-230   12-21-1982  2.50.010
MC-236   12-21-1982  8.81.040;
                     8.81.050
                     8.18.010;
MC-241   12-21-1982  8.18.030;
                     8.18.070
MC-254   3-9-1983    8.15.170;
                     9.90.010
MC-258   3-28-1983   14.08.27
MC-266   4-21-1983   6.08.090
MC-268   4-26-1983   2.56.001
MC-273   5-23-1983   13.32.010
                     2.17.020;
                     2.17.030;
                     2.17.040—
                     2.17.070;
                     2.22.010;
                     2.22.020;
MC-277   6-8-1983    2.22.040;
                     2.22.060;
                     2.45.010;
                     2.45.070;
                     5.76.460—
                     5.76.480;
                     5.76.560
MC-279   6-21-1983   8.18.080
MC-280   6-21-1983   8.18.082
MC-282   6-21-1983   10.52.010;
                     10.52.020
MC-287   7-7-1983    5.04.030
MC-288   7-7-1983    3.55.180
MC-294   8-3-1983    Ch. 5.08
MC-295   8-3-1983    5.04.075
MC-296   8-3-1983    3.55.180
                     3.44.050;
                     3.44.060;
MC-297   8-4-1983    3.44.135;
                     3.44.144;
                     3.44.160
MC-298   8-17-1983   13.20.010—
                     13.20.440
                     5.04.020—
                     5.04.045;
                     5.04.125;
                     5.04.155;
                     5.04.160;
                     5.04.180—
                     5.04.200;
                     5.04.240;
                     5.04.300;
                     5.04.305;
                     5.04.365—
                     5.04.410;
                     5.04.445;
MC-302   9-7-1983    5.04.460;
                     5.04.465;
                     5.04.495;
                     5.04.510;
                     5.04.525;
                     5.04.550;
                     5.04.555;
                     5.04.565;
                     5.04.570;
                     5.04.575;
                     5.04.585;
                     5.04.590;
                     5.84.010;
                     5.84.020
MC-310   10-25-1983  3.08.020
MC-314   11-7-1983   5.36.060
MC-320   12-6-1983   12.28.060
MC-324   12-6-1983   2.50.010
MC-325   12-6-1983   12.40.010—
                     12.40.140
MC-326   12-20-1983  3.56.060;
                     3.56.090
MC-330   12-20-1983  3.44.140
MC-331   1-10-1984   3.44.170
MC-337   1-25-1984   3.44.080
MC-339   2-14-1984   5.04.215
MC-342   2-22-1984   3.08.020
                     2.14.010—
                     2.14.030;
                     2.14.040;
                     2.15.010;
                     2.15.020;
                     8.18.040—
                     8.18.070;
                     8.66.020;
                     8.66.040;
                     8.66.060;
                     8.66.070;
                     10.12.010—
                     10.12.030;
                     10.16.010—
                     10.16.030;
                     10.16.060;
                     10.16.070;
                     10.16.090;
                     10.16.200;
MC-344   2-22-1984   10.20.010;
                     10.24.040;
                     10.24.190;
                     10.24.200;
                     10.28.050;
                     10.36.010;
                     10.36.020;
                     10.44.010;
                     10.52.060;
                     12.12.020;
                     12.12.040;
                     12.32.050;
                     12.40.010;
                     12.40.040—
                     12.40.100;
                     12.40.120;
                     12.40.130;
                     12.44.050;
                     12.48.030;
                     12.48.040
MC-345   3-7-1984    2.76.010—
                     2.76.030
MC-349   3-7-1984    12.90.040
MC-352   3-7-1984    9.32.015;
                     9.32.050
MC-355   3-22-1984   9.49.010—
                     9.49.050
MC-362   4-17-1984   2.76.010—
                     2.76.030
MC-363   4-17-1984   6.08.040
MC-370   5-22-1984   8.69.030—
                     8.69.070
MC-372   5-22-1984   9.90.010
MC-376   6-5-1984    3.55.180
                     5.04.115—
                     5.04.130;
                     5.04.150;
                     5.04.170;
                     5.04.210;
                     5.04.225;
                     5.04.235;
                     5.04.250—
                     5.04.260;
MC-382   6-20-1984   5.04.340;
                     5.04.375;
                     5.04.425;
                     5.04.430;
                     5.04.450;
                     5.04.470—
                     5.04.485;
                     5.04.515;
                     5.04.525;
                     5.04.580
MC-390   7-9-1984    2.58.030
MC-388   7-11-1984   6.12.010
MC-391   7-11-1984   5.56.040
MC-401   8-21-1984   10.16.100
MC-402   8-21-1984   8.87.050
MC-404   8-21-1984   9.90.010
                     1.26.010;
                     2.64.020;
                     2.64.040;
MC-410   9-18-1984   2.64.050;
                     2.64.070;
                     5.80.220;
                     8.36.120;
                     16.16.070
MC-415   10-16-1984  10.16.210
MC-418   10-16-1984  6.03.030
MC-423   11-9-1984   10.44.020
MC-424   12-18-1984  5.76.140
MC-427   1-25-1985   16.16.040;
                     16.16.050
MC-431   1-25-1985   3.04.010
MC-433   2-5-1985    3.38.040
MC-434   2-5-1985    10.52.020
MC-438   2-19-1985   10.52.020;
                     10.52.050
MC-452   4-15-1985   3.38.060
                     10.52.010;
MC-449   4-17-1985   10.52.020;
                     10.52.040
MC-455   5-13-1985   1.12.010;
                     1.12.020
                     2.12.010—
                     2.12.050;
                     2.28.020;
                     2.38.120;
                     3.44.150;
                     5.04.355;
                     5.04.370;
                     5.04.635;
                     5.20.100;
                     5.32.120;
                     5.36.020;
                     5.36.070;
                     5.36.090;
                     5.36.120;
                     5.44.130; Ch. 5.48;
                     5.52.020;
                     5.52.110;
                     5.56.060;
                     5.76.030;
                     5.76.570;
                     5.76.590;
                     5.80.230;
                     5.84.015;
                     6.01.130;
                     6.08.020;
                     6.08.110;
                     6.11.010;
                     6.13.010;
                     8.03.030;
                     8.06.020; Ch. 8.07;
                     8.09.020; Ch. 8.12;
                     8.15.030;
                     8.15.050—
                     8.15.120;
                     8.15.140;
                     8.15.160;
                     8.15.170;
                     8.18.030;
                     8.18.090;
                     8.48.020;
                     8.50.040;
                     8.51.020;
                     8.54.040;
                     8.57.030;
                     8.57.040;
                     8.57.080;
                     8.57.090;
                     8.60.020;
                     8.60.150;
                     8.60.070;
                     8.63.140;
                     8.66.030;
                     8.66.080;
                     8.78.010;
                     8.78.030;
                     8.81.070;
                     8.81.130;
                     8.84.020;
                     8.87.020;
                     8.87.060;
                     9.04.010;
                     9.04.030;
                     9.08.030;
                     9.12.010;
                     9.12.030;
                     9.12.040;
MC-460   5-15-1985   9.16.010;
                     9.16.020;
                     9.28.030;
                     9.32.050;
                     9.44.030;
                     9.52.060—
                     9.52.080;
                     9.56.010;
                     9.64.030;
                     9.68.060;
                     10.12.040;
                     10.16.020;
                     10.16.080;
                     10.16.100;
                     10.16.140;
                     10.24.050;
                     10.24.080;
                     10.24.120;
                     10.24.140—
                     10.24.160;
                     10.24.180;
                     10.24.200;
                     10.32.010;
                     10.32.020;
                     10.32.060;
                     10.38.010—
                     10.38.040;
                     10.44.010;
                     10.48.020;
                     10.48.100;
                     10.56.010;
                     12.12.050;
                     12.28.060;
                     12.28.100;
                     12.28.110;
                     12.32.040;
                     12.32.070;
                     12.36.040;
                     12.40.110;
                     12.40.140;
                     12.44.030;
                     12.44.040;
                     12.44.080;
                     12.44.120;
                     12.48.010;
                     12.48.050;
                     12.52.040;
                     12.60.020;
                     12.68.010—
                     12.68.030;
                     12.72.050;
                     12.76.050;
                     12.80.040;
                     12.80.050;
                     12.80.130;
                     12.80.140;
                     12.88.010;
                     12.88.020;
                     13.20.420;
                     13.20.440;
                     13.32.010;
                     13.36.120;
                     14.04.040;
                     14.08.27;
                     15.36.020;
                     15.48.110;
                     15.68.060;
                     15.74.010
MC-462   5-21-1985   6.03.030
MC-464   7-2-1985    9.90.010
MC-465   7-2-1985    10.24.190
MC-467   7-16-1985   12.94.020
MC-476   9-24-1985   2.56.001
MC-478   9-24-1985   2.56.001
MC-484   11-20-1985  12.20.010—
                     12.20.030
MC-486   12-4-1985   5.36.010;
                     5.36.060
MC-488   12-18-1985  8.63.130
MC-489   1-8-1986    12.76.045
MC-491   1-22-1986   3.04.070
MC-492   1-22-1986   14.08.27
MC-497   2-3-1986    5.76.200
                     8.36.050;
MC-498   2-18-1986   8.36.080—
                     8.36.100
MC-500   2-18-1986   10.52.020;
                     10.52.030
                     5.82.010—
MC-502   3-6-1986    5.82.030;
                     5.82.050—
                     5.82.230
MC-505   3-19-1986   5.82.050;
                     5.82.160
MC-510   4-22-1986   3.44.135
MC-511   4-22-1986   Ch. 8.75
MC-512   4-22-1986   10.52.020
MC-513   4-22-1986   3.04.010
MC-515   4-22-1986   3.44.140;
                     3.44.144
MC-519   5-20-1986   5.82.040;
                     5.82.060
MC-522   5-20-1986   5.04.175
MC-528   7-9-1986    6.08.040;
                     6.08.130
MC-530   7-22-1986   5.04.030;
                     5.04.075
MC-535   8-6-1986    5.22.010—
                     5.22.040
MC-541   8-21-1986   10.16.150
MC-542   9-11-1986   15.57.010—
                     15.57.070
MC-547   10-22-1986  10.16.150
MC-548   10-22-1986  5.04.150
MC-556   11-4-1986   3.44.065
MC-571   12-24-1986  13.32.010
MC-574   1-8-1987    10.24.220
MC-575   1-8-1987    5.52.010;
                     5.52.100
MC-576   1-8-1987    5.44.040—
                     5.44.060
MC-580   2-4-1987    15.28.170
MC-584   2-17-1987   8.36.160
MC-586   3-23-1987   9.90.010
MC-586   3-26-1987   10.52.010—
                     10.52.050
MC-591   5-13-1987   9.90.010
                     2.06.020;
MC-602   6-2-1987    3.04.070;
                     3.04.080
MC-606   9-21-1987   9.90.010
MC-609   9-21-1987   1.12.010
MC-607   9-22-1987   15.28.140
MC-608   9-22-1987   3.04.010;
                     3.04.110
                     8.01.010—
MC-613   12-21-1987  8.01.030;
                     Ch. 8.42;
                     Ch. 8.45
MC-615   1-8-1988    10.52.040
MC-618   2-17-1988   5.72.010;
                     5.72.020
MC-619   3-8-1988    9.84.020;
                     9.84.030
MC-623   4-19-1988   8.73.040
MC-624   5-4-1988    2.70.060
MC-625   5-4-1988    6.08.130
MC-631   7-6-1988    2.50.010
MC-635   9-7-1988    9.90.010
MC-636   9-7-1988    8.36.030
MC-638   9-22-1988   3.16.050—
                     3.16.070
                     6.08.030;
MC-639   9-22-1988   6.08.040;
                     6.08.100;
                     6.08.110
MC-641   11-9-1988   10.16.020;
                     10.16.150
MC-643   11-22-1988  9.70.030
                     8.36.050;
MC-645   12-7-1988   8.36.080—
                     8.36.120;
                     10.16.110
                     2.06.020;
MC-646   12-7-1988   3.04.070—
                     3.04.090
MC-649   1-4-1989    8.54.030
MC-650   1-19-1989   15.57.010—
                     15.57.070
MC-651   2-7-1989    9.80.010—
                     9.80.060
MC-652   2-20-1989   2.17.040
MC-653   3-16-1989   3.13.030
                     8.69.010;
MC-658   4-19-1989   8.69.020;
                     8.69.080
MC-659   5-15-1989   5.76.200
MC-661   6-7-1989    2.36.020;
                     2.36.030
MC-666   7-17-1989   2.04.020
MC-667   7-19-1989   14.08.27
                     10.04.025;
                     10.04.040;
MC-668   7-19-1989   10.04.070;
                     10.04.095;
                     10.16.230
                     15.20.010—
MC-670   7-19-1989   15.20.050;
                     15.20.070—
                     15.20.110
                     15.20.010—
MC-671   7-26-1989   15.20.050;
                     15.20.070—
                     15.20.110
                     15.08.010—
MC-676   9-19-1989   15.08.050;
                     15.08.070—
                     15.08.090
MC-679   9-19-1989   15.24.010—
                     15.24.060
MC-681   11-8-1989   3.13.025
MC-682   11-9-1989   15.34.010—
                     15.34.060
MC-683   11-20-1989  1.04.100
                     9.12.010;
MC-684   11-22-1989  9.12.030;
                     9.12.040
MC-689   12-8-1989   16.16.010—
                     16.16.070
                     15.37.010—
MC-694   12-18-1989  15.37.080;
                     15.37.090
MC-691   12-19-1989  12.92.010—
                     12.92.090
MC-692   12-19-1989  5.82.020
MC-696   1-9-1990    5.82.060
MC-698   1-9-1990    10.52.040
MC-702   1-27-1990   3.55.180
MC-703   1-27-1990   3.10.010
                     15.73.010—
MC-707   3-19-1990   15.73.060;
                     15.73.070—
                     15.73.120
MC-712   3-19-1990   3.44.140;
                     3.44.144
MC-714   4-2-1990    10.52.020
MC-715   4-2-1990    2.58.010
MC-728   5-8-1990    15.74.010
MC-729   5-21-1990   8.66.050
MC-731   6-4-1990    8.80.802
MC-732   6-18-1990   3.55.180
                     12.92.080;
MC-737   7-16-1990   12.93.010;
                     12.93.020
MC-738   8-6-1990    10.16.180
MC-741   9-17-1990   15.20.050
MC-742   9-17-1990   8.36.120
                     5.04.050;
                     5.04.051;
                     5.04.063;
MC-743   10-8-1990   5.04.075;
                     5.04.220;
                     5.04.320;
                     5.24.020—
                     5.24.140
                     5.04.110;
                     5.04.123—
                     5.04.165;
                     5.04.200;
                     5.04.210;
                     5.04.245;
                     5.04.265;
                     5.04.270—
                     5.04.285;
                     5.04.310;
                     5.04.315;
                     5.04.325—
                     5.04.355;
                     5.04.370;
                     5.04.375;
MC-744   10-8-1990   5.04.385;
                     5.04.415;
                     5.04.420;
                     5.04.455;
                     5.04.490;
                     5.04.500;
                     5.04.504;
                     5.04.520;
                     5.04.540;
                     5.04.545;
                     5.04.560;
                     5.04.575;
                     5.04.595;
                     5.04.620;
                     5.20.040;
                     5.20.160
MC-745   10-8-1990   3.70.010
MC-755   11-21-1990  15.73.060
MC-756   11-21-1990  5.04.076
MC-757   11-21-1990  8.38.010—
                     8.38.040
MC-760   11-27-1990  3.72.010;
                     3.72.020
MC-762   11-27-1990  10.16.150
MC-766   12-17-1990  17.05.010;
                     17.05.020
MC-768   3-12-1991   15.57.020;
                     15.57.030
MC-772   3-12-1991   8.82.010—
                     8.82.060
                     8.81.010—
                     8.81.040;
                     8.81.060—
MC-773   3-12-1991   8.81.080;
                     8.81.100—
                     8.81.130;
                     8.81.150—
                     8.81.180
MC-774   3-12-1991   10.52.020
MC-778   4-16-1991   12.93.010
                     15.20.030;
                     15.20.040;
                     Ch. 15.32;
MC-781   4-22-1991   Ch. 15.52;
                     Ch. 15.56;
                     Ch. 15.72;
                     Ch. 17.04
MC-782   5-3-1991    15.20.030;
                     15.20.040
                     12.30.010—
MC-783   5-6-1991    12.30.060;
                     12.40.120;
                     12.40.130
MC-784   5-7-1991    17.08.010—
                     17.08.060
MC-785   5-21-1991   8.60.120
                     12.96.010;
MC-786   5-21-1991   12.96.030—
                     12.96.090
MC-788   6-4-1991    8.60.120
MC-795   6-18-1991   8.95.010—
                     8.95.030
MC-796   7-2-1991    12.92.010;
                     12.92.035
MC-797   7-2-1991    9.70.010—
                     9.70.030
MC-803   8-8-1991    2.17.080
MC-804   8-20-1991   8.05.010
MC-805   9-18-1991   3.55.180
MC-807   9-18-1991   Ch. 8.33
MC-809   10-8-1991   5.82.020;
                     5.82.030
MC-811   11-6-1991   10.24.200
MC 814   12-3-1991   3.44.025
MC-815   12-17-1991  6.01.040
                     5.04.005—
                     5.04.055;
                     5.04.063;
                     5.04.065;
                     5.04.070;
                     5.04.071;
                     5.04.075;
                     5.04.085—
                     5.04.110;
                     5.04.125;
                     5.04.140—
                     5.04.160;
                     5.04.200;
                     5.04.210;
                     5.04.245;
                     5.04.265;
                     5.04.275—
MC-817   1-7-1992    5.04.295;
                     5.04.310;
                     5.04.315;
                     5.04.335—
                     5.04.385;
                     5.04.415;
                     5.04.420;
                     5.04.495—
                     5.04.504;
                     5.04.520—
                     5.04.526;
                     5.04.540;
                     5.04.545;
                     5.04.560;
                     5.04.575;
                     5.04.595;
                     5.04.610—
                     5.04.655
                     3.44.050;
MC-820   2-19-1992   3.44.060;
                     3.44.065
MC-822   3-9-1992    2.75.010;
                     2.75.020
MC-824   3-17-1992   3.73.010;
                     3.73.020
MC-828   4-7-1992    3.75.010;
                     3.75.020
                     6.08.100;
MC-833   5-19-1992   6.08.120;
                     6.08.150—
                     6.08.200
MC-835   6-3-1992    13.32.010
MC-837   6-3-1992    3.44.010
MC-839   6-11-1992   2.02.010—
                     2.02.090
MC-842   7-22-1992   10.52.010—
                     10.52.040
MC-843   7-22-1992   10.16.180
MC-848   9-9-1992    10.52.020
                     15.37.010—
MC-850   9-9-1992    15.37.080;
                     15.37.090
MC-852   11-3-1992   2.56.040;
                     2.56.070
MC-853   11-3-1992   13.32.010
MC-854   11-17-1992  12.95.010—
                     12.95.030
MC-855   12-23-1992  10.16.180
                     3.04.010;
                     3.04.020;
MC-858   1-12-1993   3.04.050;
                     3.04.070;
                     3.04.080;
                     3.04.120
MC-861   2-16-1993   10.52.030
                     8.90.010—
                     8.90.040;
MC-865   3-24-1993   8.90.060;
                     8.90.080—
                     8.90.360
MC-866   4-6-1993    9.68.010—
                     9.68.060
MC-867   4-6-1993    8.68.010;
                     8.68.020
MC-870   4-20-1993   14.08.27
MC-872   5-26-1993   10.52.020
MC-873   5-26-1993   15.12.050—
                     15.12.090
MC-875   6-9-1993    10.16.180
MC-879   6-23-1993   5.76.575
                     15.20.040;
                     15.20.080;
                     15.20.100;
                     15.28.010;
MC-880   6-23-1993   15.28.020;
                     15.28.170;
                     Ch. 15.38;
                     Ch. 15.40;
                     Ch. 15.44;
                     Ch. 15.60
MC-883   9-8-1993    2.58.010
MC-884   9-8-1993    5.82.030;
                     5.82.050
MC-892   1-12-1994   8.65.010—
                     8.65.070
                     5.82.160—
MC-893   1-12-1994   5.82.180;
                     5.82.195;
                     5.82.210
MC-894   1-26-1994   8.65.030
MC-899   3-22-1994   3.44.010;
                     3.44.120
MC-904   5-18-1994   8.69.090
MC-905   6-8-1994    8.73.040
MC-906   6-21-1994   3.10.010
MC-907   7-6-1994    10.52.030;
                     10.52.050
                     15.25.010—
MC-930   1-11-1995   15.25.030;
                     15.25.080;
                     15.25.090
MC-931   1-23-1995   9.90.010
MC-934   3-9-1995    2.56.010
                     5.04.015;
                     5.04.033;
MC-935   4-18-1995   5.04.100;
                     5.04.525;
                     5.04.615
MC-936   4-18-1995   5.04.026
MC-937   5-1-1995    5.04.360
                     3.44.050;
MC-939   6-6-1995    3.44.060;
                     3.44.065
                     5.76.030;
                     5.76.140;
                     5.76.230;
MC-943   6-6-1995    5.76.350;
                     5.76.490;
                     5.76.540;
                     5.76.550;
                     5.76.555
MC-944   6-8-1995    8.90.100
                     9.90.010;
MC-945   6-20-1995   12.98.010—
                     12.98.040
MC-947   7-12-1995   5.76.030
MC-950   8-22-1995   Ch. 13.16
MC-951   11-8-1995   8.93.010—
                     8.93.030
MC-952   11-8-1995   9.90.010
MC-954   11-21-1995  9.90.010
MC-955   12-19-1995  2.65.010—
                     2.65.060
                     15.10.020;
MC-960   3-6-1996    15.10.060;
                     15.10.080
MC-961   3-20-1996   15.73.065
MC-962   3-20-1996   5.82.020
MC-965   4-3-1996    8.60.120
MC-966   4-16-1996   8.60.120
MC-967   5-21-1996   9.68.060
MC-969   6-4-1996    9.04.025
MC-970   6-4-1996    5.22.040,
                     5.22.050
MC-971   6-4-1996    9.12.030
MC-973   7-5-1996    10.16.160;
                     10.16.220
MC-976   7-31-1996   5.82.040
MC-978   8-6-1996    9.28.010;
                     9.28.030
MC-981   9-18-1996   12.90.015;
                     12.90.140
MC-983   9-24-1996   3.04.010
MC-986   12-11-1996  3.05.010—
                     3.05.050
MC-988   12-17-1996  10.52.040—
                     10.52.055
MC-991   2-19-1997   5.04.640
MC-992   4-8-1997    10.52.050
MC-993   4-22-1997   10.16.150
MC-995   6-17-1997   9.68.010—
                     9.68.060
MC-996   6-17-1997   9.69.040
MC-1002  9-15-1997   3.80.010—
                     3.80.060
                     12.03.030;
                     12.03.060;
                     12.03.100—
MC-1004  10-21-1997  12.03.140;
                     12.03.160;
                     12.03.170;
                     Ch. 12.04;
                     Ch. 12.08
MC-1005  10-21-1997  9.90.010
MC-1006  11-18-1997  Ch. 3.52;
                     3.55.180
MC-1010  11-18-1997  13.32.010
MC-1011  12-16-1997  15.73.065
1013     1-13-1998   10.52.030
MC-1012  1-13-1998   13.32.010
MC-1014  1-13-1998   2.17.020
MC-1017  2-4-1998    5.76.070
MC-1018  2-4-1998    15.28.190
MC-1021  5-5-1998    8.90.110
                     8.60.010;
MC-1022  5-19-1998   8.60.015;
                     8.60.150
MC-1025  7-7-1998    10.52.020—
                     10.52.040
MC-1026  7-23-1998   3.55.180
                     2.04.010;
                     2.04.030;
                     2.14.010;
                     2.14.020;
                     2.14.031;
                     2.14.032;
                     2.14.040;
                     3.08.020;
                     3.16.060;
                     5.04.025;
                     5.36.050;
                     5.76.060;
                     5.80.010;
                     5.80.080;
                     8.60.080;
                     9.90.010;
                     10.28.050;
                     12.03.030;
                     12.03.060;
                     12.03.070;
                     12.03.100—
                     12.03.140;
                     12.03.160;
                     12.12.020;
                     12.12.040;
                     12.28.060;
                     12.30.010;
                     12.30.020;
                     12.40.120;
                     12.40.130;
                     12.84.410;
                     12.84.730;
MC-1027  9-9-1998    12.90.090;
                     12.90.110;
                     12.92.010;
                     12.92.030;
                     12.92.035;
                     12.92.040;
                     12.92.040—
                     12.92.070;
                     12.94.010;
                     12.94.030;
                     12.95.020;
                     12.95.030;
                     12.96.030;
                     12.96.040;
                     12.96.060—
                     12.96.080;
                     15.08.050;
                     15.08.070—
                     15.08.090;
                     15.20.020;
                     15.20.030;
                     15.20.050;
                     15.25.020;
                     15.34.020;
                     15.36.010;
                     15.37.050;
                     15.37.070;
                     15.48.090;
                     15.57.020;
                     15.57.050;
                     15.57.070;
                     15.68.020—
                     15.68.040;
                     15.73.060
MC-1029  9-22-1998   15.24.050
MC-1033  11-3-1998   10.52.040
MC-1034  11-17-1998  9.90.010
                     8.81.020;
                     8.81.070;
MC-1037  12-22-1998  8.81.090;
                     8.81.100—
                     8.81.120
MC-1038  1-12-1999   5.26.070
MC-1039  1-12-1999   5.04.005
MC-1042  3-2-1999    10.52.020;
                     10.52.040
MC-1043  4-7-1999    10.52.040
MC-1044  4-7-1999    3.38.040;
                     15.73.065
MC-1045  4-20-1999   3.38.040;
                     15.73.065
MC-1046  5-5-1999    10.24.190
MC-1049  7-8-1999    9.95.080
MC-1050  7-12-1999   Ch. 5.12;
                     5.14.160
MC-1051  7-19-1999   Ch. 5.12;
                     5.14.160
MC-1052  7-19-1999   Ch. 5.12;
                     5.14.160
                     15.12.020—
                     15.12.040;
MC-1053  8-4-1999    15.12.100—
                     15.12.140;
                     15.12.200
MC-1058  9-21-1999   5.14.120
MC-1059  10-5-1999   5.14.120
MC-1064  1-11-2000   10.16.240
MC-1065  3-7-2000    3.44.131
MC-1066  3-7-2000    10.52.030
MC-1067  3-7-2000    10.52.040;
                     10.52.050
MC-1068  4-18-2000   10.16.270
MC-1069  4-18-2000   8.36.050
MC-1070  4-18-2000   8.36.100
MC-1071  4-18-2000   8.36.120
MC-1072  5-3-2000    10.16.250
MC-1073  5-3-2000    8.60.150;
                     8.63.140
MC-1075  6-21-2000   2.64.080
MC-1078  8-8-2000    3.44.131
MC-1079  8-23-2000   10.24.190
MC-1082  9-6-2000    10.52.030;
                     10.52.050
MC-1083  9-6-2000    10.52.030;
                     10.52.040
MC-1087  9-20-2000   8.69.090
MC-1094  3-21-2001   5.04.500
MC-1099  7-9-2001    3.64.020
                     5.14.010;
MC-1100  7-24-2001   5.14.020;
                     5.14.040;
                     5.14.050
MC-1107  11-6-2001   10.16.120
MC-1109  12-4-2001   9.84.040
MC-1110  12-4-2001   10.24.190
MC-1111  12-4-2001   10.52.020;
                     10.52.030
MC-1116  2-20-2002   10.16.280
MC-1117  3-5-2002    3.44.131
MC-1118  3-19-2002   8.73.040
MC-1119  3-19-2002   8.73.040
MC-1120  3-19-2002   10.52.040
MC-1121  3-19-2002   Ch. 8.72
MC-1122  3-19-2002   8.73.040
MC-1123  4-16-2002   10.52.030
MC-1125  6-3-2002    1.12.010
MC-1127  7-16-2002   Ch. 3.54;
                     3.55.180
                     5.14.010;
                     5.14.050;
MC-1129  8-20-2002   5.14.060;
                     5.14.120;
                     5.14.160
MC-1131  11-6-2002   10.16.180
MC-1133  11-20-2002  10.24.190
MC-1134  12-4-2002   2.58.010
MC-1135  12-18-2002  14.04.020—
                     14.04.050
                     8.60.010—
MC-1138  2-19-2003   8.60.130;
                     8.60.150;
                     8.60.160
MC-1139  3-4-2003    10.24.190
MC-1143  4-22-2003   9.90.010
MC-1145  6-17-2003   8.68.010
MC-1147  8-5-2003    10.24.230
MC-1148  8-5-2003    9.92.190
MC-1150  9-16-2003   9.92.020
MC-1151  10-8-2003   10.52.020
MC-1152  10-8-2003   12.68.020
                     15.10.020;
MC-1162  1-6-2004    15.10.060;
                     15.10.080;
                     15.11.080
                     15.10.020;
MC-1163  1-23-2004   15.10.060;
                     15.10.080;
                     15.11.080
MC-1164  2-3-2004    10.52.030
MC-1166  3-2-2004    8.81.045
MC-1167  3-2-2004    8.80.802
MC-1168  3-8-2004    8.80.802
MC-1170  3-18-2004   12.80.130
MC-1171  4-6-2004    12.80.130
MC-1141  4-22-2004   5.04.497
MC-1172  5-3-2004    5.76.200
                     3.44.050;
MC-1173  5-5-2004    3.44.060;
                     3.44.065
                     3.13.010;
MC-1174  7-22-2004   3.13.020;
                     3.13.025;
                     3.13.030
MC-1175  7-22-2004   15.57.030
                     10.16.270;
                     15.25.010—
MC-1176  7-22-2004   15.25.050;
                     15.25.080;
                     15.25.090
MC-1177  8-17-2004   8.39.130
MC-1180  9-9-2004    12.80.130
MC-1185  10-5-2004   12.80.020
MC-1186  10-5-2004   5.04.360;
                     9.60.070
MC-1187  10-5-2004   15.24.030
                     5.04.495;
MC-1189  10-19-2004  5.04.496;
                     5.04.499
                     Ch. 2.41;
MC-1190  11-2-2004   Ch. 2.44;
                     Ch. 2.47
                     8.60.070;
MC-1194  4-4-2005    8.60.095;
                     8.60.130
MC-1194  5-3-2005    8.15.020;
                     8.15.170
                     6.01.020;
                     6.01.130;
                     6.01.140;
                     6.01.190;
                     6.03.020;
                     6.03.025;
                     6.05.020—
MC-1214  2-22-2006   6.05.050;
                     6.07.020—
                     6.07.080;
                     6.08.040;
                     6.08.070;
                     6.08.140;
                     6.08.145;
                     6.08.220;
                     6.09.060
MC-1215  2-22-2006   15.12.200;
                     15.12.300
MC-1216  2-22-2006   13.32.010
                     2.06.020;
                     2.10.040;
                     2.12.050;
                     2.14.040;
                     2.15.020;
MC-1220  3-20-2006   Ch. 2.16;
                     2.38.120;
                     2.54.010;
                     Ch. 2.60;
                     2.70.060;
                     2.79.020;
                     2.81.020
MC-1221  3-20-2006   13.25.070
MC-1222  4-6-2006    Ch. 3.26;
                     3.27.180
MC-1223  4-18-2006   8.82.050
MC-1224  5-16-2006   9.68.010
                     2.02.030;
MC-1226  6-7-2006    2.10.040;
                     2.14.032
MC-1228  7-12-2006   9.96.060
                     3.44.050;
MC-1230  9-6-2006    3.44.060;
                     3.44.065
MC-1231  10-3-2006   5.04.525
MC-1232  10-3-2006   Ch. 8.21
MC-1234  10-3-2006   9.90.010
MC-1235  10-3-2006   8.39.020
                     3.27.020;
MC-1238  1-23-2007   3.27.105;
                     3.27.110
MC-1241  3-6-2007    6.01.020;
                     6.01.190
MC-1242  3-20-2007   14.08.27
MC-1246  5-23-2007   8.54.010—
                     8.54.090
MC-1248  6-18-2007   8.82.010
MC-1260  12-4-2007   Ch. 8.35
                     15.10.060;
MC-1261  12-4-2007   15.10.080;
                     15.12.010;
                     15.74.010
                     15.10.060;
MC-1262  12-18-2007  15.10.080;
                     15.12.010;
                     15.74.010
                     3.44.050;
MC-1263  2-11-2008   3.44.060;
                     3.46.230
                     6.04.020;
MC-1264  2-19-2008   6.08.145;
                     6.08.220;
                     6.09.020
MC-1266  4-8-2008    15.26.180
MC-1267  4-8-2008    2.01.010
MC-1268  4-22-2008   9.93.190
                     8.60.140;
MC-1269  4-22-2008   8.60.150;
                     8.61.040
MC-1270  5-21-2008   9.92.020
MC-1271  5-21-2008   8.02.040
MC-1272  6-3-2008    5.04.015
MC-1273  6-17-2008   5.20.040
MC-1274  7-22-2008   12.92.040;
                     12.93.010
                     3.44.030;
MC-1275  7-22-2008   3.44.040;
                     3.44.065
MC-1279  8-5-2008    9.90.010
MC-1281  8-19-2008   12.03.020;
                     12.03.055
MC-1282  8-19-2008   5.04.605;
                     5.19.110
MC-1283  9-3-2008    10.24.190
MC-1287  10-7-2008   9.90.010
MC-1289  11-4-2008   2.01.010;
                     2.76.040
MC-1292  2-3-2009    15.24.010—
                     15.24.060
MC-1303  4-21-2009   10.16.120
MC-1305  5-20-2009   5.82.020
                     15.37.010—
MC-1306  6-2-2009    15.37.080;
                     15.37.090
MC-1307  6-2-2009    8.36.070;
                     15.28.150
MC-1308  6-16-2009   8.60.095
MC-1309  7-6-2009    15.10.030
MC-1311  8-18-2009   17.06.160
MC-1314  9-22-2009   9.58.060
                     2.56.001;
                     2.56.010—
MC-1318  10-20-2009  2.56.090;
                     2.56.143—
                     2.56.146;
                     2.56.195
                     8.73.010;
MC-1319  11-16-2009  8.73.050;
                     12.80.130
                     2.14.010—
                     2.14.030;
                     2.14.031;
MC-1322  4-20-2010   2.14.032;
                     2.14.040;
                     2.15.010;
                     2.15.020
MC-1324  6-8-2010    Ch. 2.77;
                     Ch. 2.80
MC-1330  8-3-2010    2.73.020;
                     2.73.030
MC-1335  10-4-2010   13.28.010—
                     13.28.025
                     12.32.020;
MC-1337  11-15-2010  12.32.060;
                     15.10.040;
                     15.10.080
MC-1339  11-16-2010  Ch. 5.68;
                     8.14.070
1341     12-1-2010   10.52.050
                     8.15.130;
MC-1343  12-20-2010  16.18.010—
                     16.18.070
MC-1344  1-11-2011   8.14.070
                     2.19.010—
MC-1352  6-21-2011   2.19.040;
                     Ch. 2.24;
                     Ch. 2.42
MC-1355  7-5-2011    2.15.020;
                     Ch. 2.78
MC-1361  8-2-2011    8.83.010—
                     8.83.060
MC-1363  8-2-2011    5.04.370;
                     5.04.495
MC-1368  1-9-2012    Ch. 17.07
                     15.26.030—
MC-1371  3-20-2012   15.26.050;
                     15.26.130
MC-1372  4-17-2012   15.20.020
                     15.20.030—
MC-1373  5-24-2012   15.20.050;
                     15.20.070—
                     15.20.110
MC-1376  9-4-2012    1.16.020—
                     1.16.080
MC-1379  10-15-2012  Ch. 15.55
MC-1380  10-17-2012  9.97.010—
                     9.97.030
MC-1382  11-20-2012  10.52.030;
                     10.52.050
MC-1388  6-3-2013    2.58.010
MC-1390  7-1-2013    8.60.095
MC-1394  12-16-2013  2.57.010
                     12.32.020;
MC-1395  1-6-2014    12.32.060;
                     15.10.040;
                     15.10.080
MC-1398  4-21-2014   10.24.190
                     5.36.010;
MC-1401  6-2-2014    5.36.015;
                     5.36.030—
                     5.36.200
MC-1407  9-15-2014   10.25.010—
                     10.25.060
MC-1410  12-1-2014   10.24.190
MC-1413  4-6-2015    3.04.070;
                     3.04.080
                     5.04.505;
                     5.04.507;
                     Ch. 5.42;
                     Ch. 12.56;
MC-1414  7-6-2015    Ch. 12.64;
                     12.80.040;
                     12.80.050;
                     12.80.060;
                     12.80.120
MC-1415  7-20-2015   9.98.010—
                     9.98.120
MC-1416  8-17-2015   Ch. 16.12
                     15.05.010—
MC-1417  10-5-2015   15.05.240;
                     15.05.260—
                     15.05.290
                     2.45.070;
MC-1418  10-5-2015   3.64.070; Ch.
                     3.68
                     8.18.060;
                     8.18.080;
                     8.18.082;
                     Ch. 8.27;
MC-1418  10-5-2015   8.30.010;
                     8.30.015—
                     8.30.070;
                     8.38.020;
                     8.69.080
MC-1419  12-7-2015   9.62.010—
                     9.62.080
                     10.52.010—
MC-1421  4-18-2016   10.52.050;
                     10.52.055
                     2.12.010;
MC-1422  5-16-2016   2.12.020;
                     Ch. 2.32;
                     Ch. 15.16
MC-1423  7-5-2016    12.21.010—
                     12.21.070
MC-1425  7-18-2016   12.24.030
MC-1428  9-6-2016    10.52.010—
                     10.52.055
                     8.24.010—
                     8.24.110;
MC-1431  11-10-2016  8.24.130;
                     8.24.140;
                     Ch. 8.24.5;
                     Ch. 8.25
MC-1432  11-23-2016  8.90.050
MC-1433  12-21-2016  15.04.010—
                     15.04.260
                     1.08.010;
                     1.08.030;
MC-1439  4-3-2017    1.08.040;
                     1.08.060—
                     1.08.090
MC-1440  4-3-2017    2.02.010—
                     2.02.100
MC-1441  4-3-2017    2.01.010
MC-1438  4-17-2017   2.58.010—
                     2.58.100
MC-1445  5-15-2017   8.19.010—
                     8.19.040
MC-1447  6-7-2017    2.50.010—
                     2.50.050
MC-1449  11-1-2017   8.18.010—
                     8.18.090
MC-1451  12-20-2017  15.57.010—
                     15.57.070
                     2.56.001—
                     2.56.140;
                     2.56.142;
                     2.56.148;
                     2.56.150—
MC-1453  1-17-2018   2.56.170;
                     2.56.171;
                     2.56.173;
                     2.56.175;
                     2.56.180;
                     2.56.190
                     2.17.010—
MC-1454  2-7-2018    2.17.110;
                     Ch. 2.18
MC-1455  2-7-2018    2.76.010—
                     2.76.040
                     Ch. 2.18;
MC-1458  2-21-2018   Ch. 2.30;
                     Ch. 2.49
MC-1459  2-21-2018   Ch. 2.31;
                     Ch. 2.40
MC-1460  2-21-2018   Ch. 2.23
MC-1463  2-21-2018   2.19.010—
                     2.19.040
                     Ch. 5.05;
MC-1464  3-7-2018    5.10.010—
                     5.10.460
                     8.97.010—
MC-1465  3-7-2018    8.97.050;
                     8.97.070—
                     8.97.160
MC-1466  3-7-2018    8.99.010—
                     8.99.080
MC-1468  3-7-2018    Ch. 2.26
                     6.14.010;
MC-1469  3-7-2018    6.14.080;
                     6.14.100—
                     6.14.115
                     6.09.010;
MC-1470  3-7-2018    6.09.050;
                     6.09.080
MC-1471  3-7-2018    Ch. 2.34;
                     Ch. 2.39
                     5.82.020—
                     5.82.050;
                     5.82.090;
                     5.82.100;
MC-1472  3-7-2018    5.82.120—
                     5.82.160;
                     5.82.180;
                     5.82.200—
                     5.82.250
                     2.22.010—
MC-1473  3-7-2018    2.22.030;
                     2.22.050
MC-1474  3-7-2018    2.45.010—
                     2.45.070
MC-1475  3-7-2018    2.04.010—
                     2.04.050
MC-1476  3-7-2018    2.08.010
MC-1477  3-7-2018    2.10.020;
                     2.10.030
                     2.58.070;
MC-1478  4-4-2018    2.58.110;
                     2.58.120
                     8.90.010—
MC-1481  4-14-2018   8.90.060;
                     8.90.080—
                     8.90.430
                     Ch. 2.43;
                     5.76.020—
                     5.76.070;
                     5.76.100;
                     5.76.110;
                     5.76.130;
                     5.76.140;
                     5.76.160;
                     5.76.170;
                     5.76.200;
                     5.76.210;
MC-1480  4-18-2018   5.76.230;
                     5.76.250;
                     5.76.260;
                     5.76.280;
                     5.76.290;
                     5.76.310—
                     5.76.340;
                     5.76.370—
                     5.76.410;
                     5.76.430;
                     5.76.440;
                     5.76.580
                     15.37.010—
MC-1482  4-18-2018   15.37.080;
                     15.37.090
MC-1483  4-18-2018   2.27.010—
                     2.27.060
                     3.55.030—
                     3.55.065;
                     3.55.080;
                     3.55.090;
                     3.55.110;
                     3.55.150;
                     Ch. 3.60;
                     3.64.010—
                     3.64.070;
                     5.44.025—
                     5.44.070;
                     5.44.086;
MC-1484  4-18-2018   5.44.100;
                     8.60.020—
                     8.60.060;
                     8.60.080;
                     8.60.090;
                     8.60.160;
                     12.32.050;
                     14.08.08—
                     14.08.12;
                     14.08.15;
                     14.08.17;
                     14.08.19;
                     14.08.23;
                     14.08.27
MC-1485  4-18-2018   5.14.160
MC-1486  4-18-2018   Ch. 5.40
                     5.52.020;
                     5.52.070;
MC-1487  4-18-2018   Ch. 5.60;
                     5.84.010;
                     5.84.020
MC-1491  7-5-2018    10.52.020;
                     10.52.040
MC-1498  7-5-2018    Ch. 2.20
MC-1503  9-5-2018    5.10.010—
                     5.10.460
MC-1504  10-3-2018   2.82.010;
                     2.82.020
MC-1508  10-17-2018  2.03.010
MC-1501  11-6-2018   5.18.010—
                     5.18.310
MC-1509  11-21-2018  2.03.010
MC-1502  12-5-2018   10.52.020;
                     10.52.040
MC-1510  12-19-2018  2.03.010
MC-1512  1-10-2019   2.03.010
MC-1511  2-6-2019    2.58.010
MC-1514U 2-20-2019   2.46.010—
                     2.46.130
MC-1515  3-6-2019    2.46.010—
                     2.46.130
MC-1516  5-1-2019    2.02.060;
                     2.02.080
MC-1517  6-19-2019   5.30.010—
                     5.30.120
MC-1520  6-19-2019   5.36.060;
                     5.36.110
MC-1519  7-17-2019   5.10.250
                     3.12.010—
2453     8-13-2019   3.12.030;
                     3.13.010;
                     3.13.020
                     2.45.010—
                     2.45.080;
                     8.30.015;
                     8.30.021;
                     8.30.022;
                     8.30.026;
                     8.30.030;
                     8.30.035;
                     8.30.041;
                     8.30.045;
                     8.36.090—
                     8.36.120;
                     9.92.170;
                     9.92.180;
                     9.92.090;
                     9.94.010—
MC-1521  9-18-2019   9.94.140;
                     15.04.020;
                     15.04.030;
                     15.04.050—
                     15.04.080;
                     15.04.120;
                     15.05.010—
                     15.05.240;
                     15.05.260—
                     15.05.290;
                     15.20.090;
                     15.28.020;
                     15.28.140;
                     15.28.150;
                     15.28.170;
                     15.28.200—
                     15.28.220
                     15.04.020;
                     15.04.050—
                     15.04.070;
                     15.04.210;
                     15.04.250;
                     15.05.010;
                     15.08.050;
                     15.08.060;
MC-1525  1-15-2020   15.10.080;
                     15.28.150;
                     15.28.160;
                     15.36.010;
                     15.48.040;
                     15.48.060;
                     15.48.090;
                     15.57.020—
                     15.57.040;
                     15.68.050
                     8.60.150;
MC-1535  5-6-2020    8.60.155;
                     8.61.030;
                     9.93.020
MC-1541  9-2-2020    5.10.080
                     5.30.120;
MC-1545  10-7-2020   8.01.010;
                     8.01.030
MC-1547  10-21-2020  5.10.425
MC-1551  12-7-2020   3.57.010—
                     3.57.120
MC-1552  4-7-2021    2.17.040
                     9.92.010—
                     9.92.180;
                     9.93.010—
MC-1553  2-17-2021   9.93.040;
                     9.93.060—
                     9.93.170;
                     9.93.200
MC-1558  6-2-2021    2.55.010;
                     2.55.020
                     12.05.010—
MC-1560  6-16-2021   15.05.090;
                     12.05.110
MC-1563  9-1-2021    9.90.010
                     2.28.010;
                     2.28.020;
                     13.08.010—
                     13.08.050;
MC-1562  9-15-2021   13.08.055;
                     13.08.060—
                     13.08.100;
                     13.08.105;
                     13.08.110;
                     13.32.010
MC-1566  12-1-2021   8.24.090;
                     8.24.095
MC-1567  12-15-2021  1.16.010—
                     1.16.080
MC-1569  2-2-2022    3.04.070
MC-1571  2-2-2022    2.82.010
MC-1573U 2-16-2022   2.55.030
MC-1568  5-4-2022    3.05.010—
                     3.05.050
MC-1576  5-4-2022    15.05.300
                     8.60.010; 8.60.030;
MC-1578  5-18-2022   8.60.070;
                     8.60.130;
                     8.60.170
MC-1595  11-2-2022   2.82.020
MC-1605  2-1-2023    3.04.010—
                     3.04.140
MC-1612  3-15-2023   8.24.050
MC-1596  8-16-2023   9.90.010
MC-1619  10-4-2023   15.27.010—
                     15.27.110
MC-1622  1-17-2024   8.79.010—
                     8.79.770
                     2.04.010;
                     2.08.010;
                     2.10.010—
                     2.10.040;
                     2.15.010;
                     2.15.020;
                     2.62.020;
                     2.70.060;
                     2.83.010;
                     2.83.020;
                     3.04.020;
                     3.04.060;
                     3.04.080;
                     3.05.010;
                     3.05.030;
                     3.05.050;
                     3.08.020;
                     3.16.060;
                     3.44.050—
                     3.44.080;
                     3.44.100—
                     3.44.144;
                     3.44.160;
                     3.46.020;
                     3.55.030—
                     3.55.065;
                     3.55.080;
                     3.55.090;
                     3.55.110;
                     3.55.150;
                     3.64.050;
                     3.64.070;
                     5.10.080;
                     5.10.130;
                     5.10.150;
                     5.10.180;
                     5.10.230;
                     5.10.280;
                     5.10.310;
                     5.10.360;
                     5.18.040;
                     5.30.020;
                     5.30.040;
                     5.30.050;
                     5.30.090;
                     5.30.100;
                     5.36.050;
                     5.44.025;
MC-1625  2-21-2024   5.44.030;
                     5.44.070;
                     5.44.086;
                     5.44.100;
                     5.76.040—
                     5.76.070;
                     5.76.110;
                     5.76.130;
                     5.76.140;
                     5.76.170;
                     5.76.230;
                     5.76.260;
                     5.76.280;
                     5.76.290;
                     5.76.310—
                     5.76.340;
                     5.76.380—
                     5.76.410;
                     5.76.580;
                     5.82.030;
                     5.82.090;
                     5.82.150;
                     8.14.010;
                     8.18.010;
                     8.18.020;
                     8.18.070;
                     8.60.020—
                     8.60.050;
                     8.60.080—
                     8.60.095;
                     8.60.160;
                     8.81.170;
                     8.97.100;
                     12.32.050;
                     14.08.11;
                     15.04.150;
                     15.05.030;
                     15.20.030;
                     15.20.050;
                     15.26.040;
                     15.27.030;
                     15.37.045;
                     15.37.060;
                     15.37.070;
                     15.37.090;
                     15.57.020;
                     15.57.050;
                     16.18.010;
                     17.08.040
MC-1626  2-21-2024   2.58.010
                     15.04.020;
                     15.04.050—
                     15.04.070;
                     15.04.210;
                     15.04.250;
                     15.05.010;
                     15.08.050;
                     15.08.060;
MC-1643  10-2-2024   15.10.080;
                     15.28.150;
                     15.28.160;
                     15.36.010;
                     15.48.040;
                     15.48.060;
                     15.48.090;
                     15.57.020—
                     15.57.040;
                     15.68.050
MC-1651  5-21-2025   10.52.010—
                     10.52.060
MC-1653  9-3-2025    Adopting Ordinance
MC-1657  12-17-2025  10.24.195
                    
 
 
